
Japan, known asNihonorNippon(日本) inJapanese, is an island nation inEast Asia. Its insular character has allowed it to develop a unique and very intricate culture, while its closeness to other ancient East Asian cultures, in particularChina, has left lasting influence. Despite belonging to a nation long at war, Japan's people have always placed emphasis on inner balance, tranquility and natural beauty. These traditional values have become increasingly important now that Japan has grown to be one of the world's most densely-populated countries, and its legendary work ethic makes life in its cities quite hectic.
Japan's sophisticated cuisinehas spread to all corners of the world, but it is only in the country of its birth where you can appreciate its true form. Japanese pop culture is enormously popular around the world, especiallyanime, mangaand video games, driving tourism to this country.
In the 19th and 20th centuries, Japan enjoyed impressive economic growth, putting it among the world's most affluent nations today. This was mostly driven by rapid modernization and specialization in high technology. Japan is full of contrasts between the living tradition and much cherished heritage, and its ultra-modern infrastructure, buildings and facilities.
While the Japanese are known to be reserved and their English language skills are not their strongest asset, they will go out of their way to make you feel a welcome visitor. Japanese retail businesses are also known for their legendary customer service, and visitors from overseas are often surprised at the lengths service staff will go to satisfy the demands of customers.
Japan is administratively divided into 47 prefectures. These are conventionally grouped into nine regions, listed here from north to south:


Japan has about 800 cities; these are nine of the most important to the traveller.
SeeJapan's Top 3for some sights and places held in high esteem by the Japanese themselves, andOff the beaten track in Japanfor a selection of fascinating but less well known destinations throughout the country.
Often called the "Land of the Rising Sun", Japanese culture stretches back millennia, yet it has also adopted (and created) the latest modern fashions and trends.
Japan is a study in contrasts and contradictions. Many Japanese corporations dominate their industries, yet Japan has suffered a prolonged economic slowdown since 1989. Cities are some of the most modern and high tech in the world, but tumbledown wooden shacks can still be spotted next to glass-fronted designer condominiums. Japan has beautiful temples and gardens which are often surrounded by garish signs and ugly concrete buildings. In the middle of a modern skyscraper you might discover a sliding wooden door which leads to a traditional room with tatami mats, calligraphy, and tea ceremony. These juxtapositions mean you may often be surprised and rarely bored in Japan.
Although Japan is seen in the West as a land combining tradition and modernity, and juxtapositions definitely exist, part of this idea is obsolete, and is a product of Japan being the first major Asian power to modernize as well as Western patronization and heavy promotion by the travel industry. Continued demolition of some of Japan's historic landmarks goes on apace. Still, with the proper planning, and with expectations held in check, a trip to Japan can be incredibly enjoyable and definitely worthwhile.
Japan's location on islands at the outermost edge of Asia has had a profound influence on its history. Close to mainland Asia, yet far enough to keep itself separate, Japan has experienced alternating periods of closure and openness. Until the mid-19th century, Japan was able to turn on or off its connection to the rest of the world, accepting foreign cultural influences in fits and starts.
Recorded Japanese history begins in the 5th century, although archeological evidence of settlement stretches back 50,000 years. The mythical Emperor Jimmu is said to have founded the current Imperial line in the 7th century BCE. Archeological evidence, however, has only managed to trace the Imperial line back to theKofun Periodduring the 3rd to 7th centuries CE, which was also when the Japanese first had significant contact with China and Korea. Japan then gradually became a centralized state during theAsuka Period, during which Japan extensively absorbed many aspects of Chinese culture, and saw the introduction of Mahayana Buddhism and Confucianism. During that period, Prince Shotoku, the regent of Japan, sent envoys to Tang China to learn more about Chinese culture and practices and introduce them to Japan.
The first strong Japanese state was centered inNara(Heijo-kyo), which was built to model the then Chinese capitalChang'an. This period, dubbed theNara Periodwas the last time the emperor held political power. Power fell into the hands of the Fujiwara clan of court nobles (kuge) during theHeian Period, when the capital was moved toKyoto(Heian-kyo), also modeled after the Chinese capital Chang'an. It remained the Japanese imperial residence until the 19th century. Chinese influence reached its peak during the early Heian Period, during which Buddhism became a popular religion among the masses. This was followed by theKamakura Period, when the samurai warrior class gained political power. Minamoto no Yoritomo, the most powerful of them, was dubbedshogunby the emperor, and ruled from his base inKamakura. In theMuromachi Period, theAshikaga shogunatecame to power, ruling from their base inAshikaga. Japan descended into the chaos of theWarring States Periodin the 15th century.
Japan was unified towards the end of the Warring States Period, known as theAzuchi-Momoyama Period, under the influence of the powerful warlords Oda Nobunaga and Toyotomi Hideyoshi, ruling from their bases inKiyosuandOsakarespectively. Tokugawa Ieyasu completed unification of the country in 1600 through his victory at theBattle ofSekigahara, and founded theTokugawa Shogunate, a feudal state ruled from Edo, or modern-dayTokyo. Although the Emperor and his court nobles continued to rule in name from the imperial capital in Kyoto, in practice, absolute power was concentrated in the hands of the Shogun. A strict caste system was imposed, with the Shogun and hissamuraiwarriors at the top of the heap and no social mobility permitted.
During thisEdo Period, Tokugawa rule kept the country stable but stagnant with a policy of strict isolationism while the West rushed ahead. U.S. Commodore Matthew Perry's Black Ships arrived inYokohamain 1854, forcing the country to open up to trade with the West. This resulted in the signing of unequal treaties, leading to the collapse of the shogunate, and power being returned to the emperor in theMeiji Restorationof 1868. The imperial capital was relocated from Kyoto to Edo, now renamed Tokyo. Japan observed Western colonization in Southeast Asia and the division and weakening of China, which they had for so long considered to be the world's greatest superpower. Vowing not to be overtaken by the West, Japan launched itself headlong into a drive to modernize at frantic speed, and became the non-Western country to industrialize. Adopting Western technology and culture wholesale, Japan's cities soon sprouted railways, brick buildings and factories. The disastrous Great Kanto Earthquake of 1923, which flattened large parts of Tokyo and killed over 100,000 people, was barely a bump in the road.
From day one, resource-poor Japan had looked elsewhere for the supplies it needed, and this soon turned into a drive toexpand and colonizeits neighbors. During the Sino-Japanese War of 1894–95, Japan took control of Taiwan, Korea and parts of Manchuria, and its victory against Russia in the 1904–05 Russo-Japanese War cemented its position of strength. With an increasingly totalitarian government controlled by the military, Japan overthrew the Korean monarchy and annexed Korea in 1910. DuringWorld War I, Japan participated in the war as part of the Allies and subsequently gained control of the German concessions in China. Japan then staged the Mukden Incident as a pretext to occupyManchuriain 1931, and launched a full-scale invasion of China in 1937. Japan invaded BritishHong Kongand Southeast Asia in 1941, and by the middle of 1942, had anempirestretching across much of eastern Asia and the Pacific. In 1941, Japan attackedPearl Harbor, destroying a small portion of the U.S. Pacific fleet but drawing the U.S. into the war, whose tide soon started to turn against Japan. Japan was forced to surrender in 1945 after thenuclear attacksonHiroshimaandNagasaki. 1.86 million Japanese civilians and military personnel had died, well over 10 million Chinese and other Asians, and Japan was occupied for the first time in its history. The Japanese government has been lukewarm at best in apologizing for or even acknowledging the atrocities committed during World War II, which remains a major bone of contention in diplomatic relations with other Asian countries, in particular its neighbors China and South Korea.
The Emperor kept his throne but was turned into a constitutional monarch. Thus converted to pacifism and democracy, with the U.S. taking care of defense, Japan now directed its prodigious energies into peaceful technology, and re-emerged from poverty to conquer the world's marketplaces with an endless stream of cars and consumer electronics, attaining the second-largest GDP in the world after the United States.
But frenzied growth could not last forever, and in 1989, the bubble well and truly burst. In the 1990s, Japan'slost decade, the real estate bubbles deflated, the stock market fell by half, and theGreat Hanshin Earthquakeof 1995 leveled parts ofKobeand killed over 6,000 people. The economy has yet to fully recover from its doldrums, with deflation driving down prices, an unsupportable burden of government debt, and a polarization of Japanese society into "haves" with permanent jobs and "have-not"freetersdrifting between temporary jobs. National anxiety has also increased because neighboringChinais taking a more assertive regional stance, and has overtaken Japan to become the world's second largest economy. Nevertheless, Japan continues to be home to many of the world's leading high technology corporations, and the Japanese maintain one of the highest standards of living in the world.
Tragedy struck again in March 2011 with theGreat Tohoku Earthquake and Tsunami. Japan's worst disaster since World War II claimed the lives of over 15,000 people with another 2,500 missing. Many cities and towns in northernTohokulocated along the Pacific coast were severely damaged or destroyed. InMatsushima, it is believed that the pine-clad islands that are offshore helped mitigate the impact of the tsunami and saved the city from substantial damage. The islands are a famous attraction in Matsushima, and are said to be one of Japan's "Three Great Views."
In May 2019, Emperor Naruhito ascended to the Chrysanthemum Throne after the abdication of his father, Emperor Emeritus Akihito. This marked the first Imperial succession from a living emperor since Emperor Kōkaku abdicated the throne in 1817.
Japan is a constitutional monarchy, modeled after the British parliamentary system. The Imperial House of Japan is the oldest continuing hereditary monarchy house in the world, traditionally said to have began in 660 BC. The constitution enacted after World War II redefined the emperor's role to be entirely ceremonial; unlike European monarchs, he is not even the source of sovereign power, nor is it "his" government. The few government functions he performs are always done following instructions from the Cabinet.
The legislative branch is the National Diet, consisting of the upper House of Councillors and the larger and more powerful lower House of Representatives. Both are popularly elected under a parallel system, where some seats are filled by individual candidates and others are filled by a party. The Cabinet forms the executive branch of government. It is led by the prime minister, who is elected by the Diet; the prime minister appoints ministers to the Cabinet, a majority of whom must be members of the Diet. The Supreme Court and three tiers of lower courts form the judicial branch.
Japan has several major political parties, which have shifted, merged, and split over time. The Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), which is generally conservative and pro-business, has been in power almost continuously since 1955. Led by geriatric bureaucrats, mired in factional politics and endless minor scandals, the LDP as of 2025 continues to reign with no compelling alternatives in sight.
As an island nation shut off from the rest of the world for a very long time (with only some contact with China and Korea), Japan is veryhomogeneous, and over 99% of the population is of Yamato (i.e. Japanese) ethnicity. The largest minority are Koreans, around 1 million strong, many in their 3rd or 4th generations. There are also sizable populations of Chinese, Filipinos and Brazilians, although many of the latter are of Japanese descent. Though largely assimilated, the resident Chinese population maintains a presence in Japan's three Chinatowns inKobe,NagasakiandYokohama. Indigenous ethnic minorities include theAinuonHokkaido, gradually driven north over the centuries and now numbering around 50,000, and theRyukyuanpeople ofOkinawa.
Japan's population started shrinking in 2008, and since efforts to increase the birth rate have largely fallen flat, immigration is increasingly being used to fill in the gaps. Particularly in Tokyo quite a few service industry workers now hail from China, Vietnam or Nepal.
The Japanese are well known for their politeness. Many Japanese are thrilled to have visitors to their country and are incredibly helpful to lost and bewildered-looking foreigners. Younger Japanese people are often extremely interested in meeting and becoming friends with foreigners as well. Do not be surprised if a young Japanese person (usually of the opposite gender) approaches you in a public place and tries to initiate a conversation with you in English. On the other hand, many are not used to dealing with foreigners (外人gaijin, or 外国人gaikokujin) and are more reserved and reluctant to communicate.
Foreign visitors are rarer outside the major cities, and you may encounter moments when entering a shop causes the staff to seemingly panic and scurry off into the back. They're just afraid that you'll try to address them in English and they'll be embarrassed because they can't understand or reply. A smile and akonnichiwa("Hello") often helps.
Having been in the Chinese cultural sphere for much of its history, substantial Chinese influences can be seen in Japanese culture. They have been seamlessly blended with native Japanese customs to give rise to a culture that is distinctly Japanese.
During the Edo Period, Japanese culture was strongly influenced by Confucianism. The Tokugawa Shogunate instituted a rigid class system, with the Shogun at the apex, a small group of feudal lords calleddaimyōbelow him, and the other samurai below that, followed by a vast population of commoners below them. At the bottom below even the commoners was a group of outcastes called theburakumin, who took on jobs considered "unclean" such as undertakers, butchers and executioners. Commoners were expected to pay respect to samurai (at the risk of being killed if they didn't), and women were expected to be subservient to men. Samurai were expected to adopt a "Death before dishonor" attitude, and would typically commit suicide by self-disembowelment (harakiri/seppuku) rather than live in shame. Although the Edo Period ended with the Meiji Restoration in 1868, its legacy lives on in Japanese society. Honor remains an important concept in Japanese society, employees are still expected to be unquestioningly obedient to their bosses, and women continue to struggle for equal treatment.
Japanese people are fiercely proud of their heritage and culture, and hold on to many ancient traditions that go back hundreds of years. At the same time, they also seem to be obsessed with the latest technology, and consumer technology in Japan is often several years ahead of the rest of the world. This paradox of being traditional yet ultramodern often serves to intrigue visitors.
The most important holiday in Japan is theNew Year(お正月Oshōgatsu), which pretty much shuts down the country from 30 December to 3 January. Japanese head home to their families (which means massive transport congestion), eat festive foods, and head out to the neighborhood temple at the stroke of midnight to wish in the New Year. Many Japanese travel to other countries as well, and prices for airfares are very high.
In March or April, Japanese head out en masse forhanami(花見, lit. "flower viewing"), a festival of outdoors picnics and drunken revelry in parks, cleverly disguised ascherry blossom(桜sakura) viewing. The exact timing of the famously fleeting blossoms varies from year to year and Japan's TV channels follow the progress of the cherry blossom front from south to north obsessively.Topsakuraspotslike Kyoto are packed with tourists. Peakhanamioften coincides with the start of the new school & financial year on April 1, which means lots of people on the move and full hotels in major cities.
Japan's longest holiday isGolden Week(29 April to 5 May), when there are four public holidays within a week and people go on an extended vacation. Trains become crowded and flight and hotel prices are jacked up to multiples of normal prices, making this a bad time to travel in Japan, but the weeks immediately before or after Golden Week are excellent choices.
Summer brings a spate of festivals designed to distract people from the intolerable heat and humidity. There are local festivals (祭matsuri) and impressive fireworks competitions (花火hanabi) throughout the country.Tanabata(七夕), on 7 July (or early August in some places), commemorates a story of star-crossed lovers who could only meet on this day.
The largest summer festival isObon(お盆), held in mid-July in eastern Japan (Kanto) and mid-August in western Japan (Kansai), which honors departed ancestral spirits. Everybody heads home to visit village graveyards, and transport is packed.
Christmas Day(25 December) is not a public holiday in Japan, but most Japanese people nevertheless celebrate it by ordering fried chicken from KFC for their Christmas meal. If you wish to partake in this tradition, be sure to place your orders well in advance, as the high volume of orders received for this day means that you're not guaranteed to snag a meal by just showing up on the day.Christmas Eveis considered to be one of the most romantic days of the year in Japan, and restaurants will be fully booked by young couples looking to have a romantic night out, so be sure to make your dinner reservations well in advance.
Valentine's Day(14 February) is typically celebrated in Japan by women giving chocolates to men, of which there are two types:giri-choco(義理チョコ, lit. "obligation chocolate") is given as a courtesy to male colleagues, classmates, acquaintances etc., whilehonmei-choco(本命チョコ, lit. "true feelings chocolate") is given to a man the woman has romantic feelings for. Men will reciprocate the favor by givinggiri-chocoto their female colleagues, classmates, etc., orhonmei-chocoto their romantic partners, onWhite Day(14 March), so-named because white chocolate was traditionally given on this day, though in modern times all kinds of chocolate, including dark chocolate may be given.
Holidays based on the seasons, such as equinoxes, may vary by a day or two. Additional bank holidays, also known as compensation holidays, are usually added if any holiday falls on a Sunday, and in cases when two dates for holidays are close together.
Most Japanese people take additional time off around New Year's, during Golden Week, and during Obon. The most important festival is New Year's Day, and many shops and restaurants close for at least 2 days during this period. However, convenience stores remain open, and many temples conduct New Year's Day fairs, so it's still not difficult to find food to eat.
The Imperial era year, which counts from the year of ascension of the Emperor, is often used for reckoning dates in Japan, including transportation timetables and store receipts.
The current era isReiwa(令和), which began on 1 May 2019 with the ascension of Emperor Naruhito to the Chrysanthemum Throne. Reiwa 6 corresponds to 2024; the year may be written as "R6" or just "6". You may see dates written down in the format of year/month/date; for example, "6/4/1" is 1 April 2024.
The Western Gregorian calendar is commonly used. Japan has celebrated its festivals according to the Gregorian calendar since 1873 and no longer uses the Chinese calendar, with the exception of some festivals in the Ryukyu Islands.
When traveling throughout Japan, first-time visitors will be shocked at how many swastikas (卍,manji) they see on maps and at temples. This is a symbol of Buddhism, and marks Buddhist temples or other sacred sites to Japanese Buddhism. The symbol will always be in a "square" (i.e. not at an angle) and will open to the left. While the Nazis appropriated the swastika from Buddhism and Hinduism, their version opens to the right and can be at an angle. The Japanese version is unrelated to the Nazi one.
Japan has two dominant religious traditions:Shinto(神道Shintō) is the ancient animist religion of traditional Japan. At just over 1,200 years in Japan,Buddhism(仏教Bukkyō) is the more recent imported faith.Christianity(キリスト教Kirisutokyō), introduced by European missionaries, was widely persecuted during the feudal era but is now accepted, and a small percentage of Japanese are Christian, concentrated in western Japan.
Generally speaking, the Japanese are not a particularly religious people. While they are strongly influenced by Buddhist philosophies and regularly visit shrines and temples to offer coins and make silent prayers, religious faith and doctrine play a small role (if any) in the life of the average Japanese. Thus it would be impossible to try to represent what percentage of the population is Shinto versus Buddhist, or even Christian. According to a famous poll, Japan is 80% Shintoand80% Buddhist, and another oft-quoted dictum states that Japanese are Shinto when they live, as weddings and festivals are typically Shinto, but Buddhist when they die, since funerals usually use Buddhist rites. Neither Buddhism nor Shinto demand exclusivity, so most Japanese practice a mix of both religions.
At the same time, Shinto and Buddhism have had an enormous influence on the country's history and cultural life. The Shinto religion focuses on the spirit of the land, and is reflected in the country's exquisite gardens and peaceful shrines deep in ancient forests. When you visit a shrine (神社jinja) with its simpletorii(鳥居) gate, you are seeing Shinto customs and styles. If you see an empty plot of land with some white paper suspended in a square, that's a Shinto ceremony to dedicate the land for a new building. Buddhism in Japan has branched out in numerous directions over the centuries. Westerners are probably most familiar with Zen (禅) Buddhism, which was introduced to Japan in the 14th and 15th centuries. Zen fit the aesthetic and moral sensibilities of medieval Japan, influencing arts such as flower-arranging (生け花ikebana), tea ceremony (茶道sadō), ceramics, painting, calligraphy, poetry, and themartial arts. Over the years, Shinto and Buddhism have intertwined considerably. You will find them side by side in cities, towns, and people's lives. It's not at all unusual to find a sparse Shintotoriistanding before an elaborate Buddhist temple (お寺o-tera).
Christianity is evident almost exclusively in a commercial sense. In season, variations of Santa Claus, Christmas trees and other non-religious Christmas symbols are on display in malls and shopping centers throughout metropolitan areas. A Christian minority exists in Japan, and there was historically a group calledKakure Kirishitan(隠れキリシタン) or "hidden Christians" who went underground when Japan persecuted Christianity. However, this group is all but extinct nowadays, having become mainstream Christians or Shinto/Buddhist for the most part. At 1-2% of the Japanese population, Christianity is not very visible and most Japanese people will have wrong or no knowledge of even basic tenets of Christianity. Conversely, a lot of Christian imagery (mainly Gothic cathedral architecture styles) is used inanime,mangaand video games; this is less so due to religious reasons or undertones in the works, but rather due to the fact that a lot of Japanese think that imagery is asthetically pleasing.
The Japanese are proud of their four seasons, but the tourist with a flexible travel schedule should aim for spring or autumn.
There are multitudes of books written on Japan. A good place to begin is one of the many recommended reading lists such as sites likeThe Crazy Japan TimesorJapan Visitor. Some recommended books include:
Television shows about Japan:
Much of the government's travel information is available in English.
TheJapaneselanguage has several distinct dialects. Standard Japanese (hyōjungo標準語), which is based on the Tokyo dialect, is taught in schools and known by most people throughout the country. The slang-heavy dialect of theKansairegion is particularly famous in Japanese pop culture, while the northernTohokuregion and southernKyushuare famous for their impenetrable dialects. On the southern islands ofOkinawa, many of the closely relatedRyukyuanlanguages are spoken, mostly by the elderly, while many locals speak Okinawan Japanese, a dialect that borrows much vocabulary from Ryukyuan languages. In northernHokkaido, a rare few still speakAinu.
Japanese is written using a mix of three different scripts:kanji(漢字) or Chinese characters, andhiragana(ひらがな) andkatakana(カタカナ) syllabaries. There are thousands of kanji in everyday use and even the Japanese spend years learning them, but thekanahave only 46 characters each and can be learned with a reasonable amount of effort. Of the two,katakanaare probably more useful for the visitor as they are used to write loanwords from foreign languages other than Chinese, and thus can be used to figure out the numerous English loan words in Japanese likebasu(バス,bus),kamera(カメラ, camera) orkonpyūtā(コンピューター, computer). However, some words liketerebi(テレビ, television),depāto(デパート, department store),wāpuro(ワープロ, word processor) andsūpā(スーパー, supermarket) may be harder to figure out. Knowing Chinese will also be a great head start for tacklingkanji, but not all words mean what they seem: 手紙 (lit. "hand-paper"; Mandarin Chinese:shǒuzhǐ, Japanese:tegami), "toilet paper" to the Chinese, means "letter" (the kind you mail) in Japan!
AlthoughEnglishis a compulsory subject in Japanese schools, the focus is entirely on formal writing and grammar. Outside of major tourist attractions and large international hotels, it israreto find people who are conversant in English. If you travel beyond Tokyo, Kyoto and Osaka, you may find that even hotel reception staff are unable to converse in English. Reading and writing tends to come a lot better though, and many Japanese are able to understand written English well despite not being able to speak it. If you are lost, it can be practical to write out a question in simple words and someone will likely be able to point you in the right direction. You should carry your hotel's business card with you, to show a taxi driver or someone if you lose your way. Many Japanese will go to extraordinary lengths to understand what you want and to help you, so it is worthwhile to try to pick up at least basic greetings and thank yous to put people at ease.
Public facilities like trains almost universally include English signage, and the Shinkansen and other commonly-used trains also announce upcoming stops in English. Tourist attractions and large businesses also usually have at least some English signage, but as you get farther off the beaten path, English becomes more spotty (and the translations more questionable).
Some of the major tourist attractions and large international hotels in Tokyo have staff who can speakMandarinorKorean, and many major airports and railway stations also have signs in Chinese and Korean as well. In Hokkaido, a few people who live in ports frequented by Russian sailors may know someRussian.
Japanese Sign Language(JSL, 日本手話nihon shuwa) is the dominant sign language. Its adoption has been slow. It is mutually intelligible with Korean and Taiwanese Sign Languages, but not with any others.
You can contact your nearestJapanese embassies and consulatesfor more details.
Citizens of many countries, including the US, Canada, UK and EU, can obtain entry permission on arrival without a visa. This is usually valid for a stay of up to 90 days, although Mexicans and some Europeans are permitted to stay for 180 days if they ask for a longer stay upon entry. All others must obtain a "temporary visitor" visa prior to arrival, which is generally valid for a stay of 90 days. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs maintains anon-line Guide to Japanese Visas.
No visa is required for a same-day transit between international flights at the same airport, so long as you do not leave the secured area.
Visitors with tickets for onward travel to a third country may be granted aShore Passfor a maximum of 72 hours with their permitted stay area limited to the vicinity of the port of entry. The port of departure does not have to be the same as the port of entry. Instead, it only needs to be in its vicinity.
Shore Passes are granted at immigration discretion and airlines may hesitate to allow you to board if you have a multi-day layover and are relying on getting on. Getting a transit visa in advance is always a safer option.
Travellers entering Japan with anything other than a temporary visitor visa are required to obtain a "Residence Card" (在留カード), colloquially known as agaijin card, within 90 days of arrival and carry it at all times in lieu of their passport. Those staying for 90 days or less may complete this registration, but they are not obligated to. This will be invalidated upon exit from Japan, unless a re-entry permit is held.
Foreigners must typically fill out adisembarkation formfor immigration, adeclaration formfor customs, and aquarantine formif required. TheVisit Japan Web servicecan be used to electronically submit all required forms in advance. After completing the forms, present the QR code to the immigration and customs stations.
Drug lawsare stricter in Japan than in many other countries. Some over-the-counter and prescription drugs that are legal in other countries are not allowed in Japan. Ignorance is not considered an excuse, and you can expect to be jailed and deported if caught. See theJapan Customs websitefor details, or check with the nearest Japanese embassy or consulate. (See also§Drugs.)
By law, Japan also forbids the importation of mostmeat, fruit, vegetable and plant products,in some cases punishable by imprisonment and/or fines of up to ¥3 million.
Once in Japan, you must carry yourpassport or trusted traveler card(see below) with you at all times. If caught in a random check without it (and nightclub raids are not uncommon), you'll be detained until somebody can fetch it for you. First offenders who apologize are usually let off with a warning, although you could be fined up to ¥200,000.
All foreigners (except those on government business and certain permanent residents) age 16 and older are electronically fingerprinted and photographed as part of immigration entry procedures. This may be followed by a short interview conducted by the immigration officer. Entry will be denied if any of these procedures are refused.
Foreigners who travel frequently to Japan may be able to take advantage of Japan'sTrusted Traveler Programto expedite arrival procedures. Among the requirements in order to use the service, you must possess a passport from a country that has visa-free arrangements with Japan, have never been deported, and have never been criminally convicted. United States citizens enrolled in Global Entry (the US Trusted Traveler Program) can also apply if they visit Japan frequently.
The fee to apply for the program is ¥2,200. Upon approval, you will receive a registered user card valid for either 3 years or until the expiration date of your passport, whichever is sooner. The card will allow you to use the automated immigration kiosks at Haneda, Narita, Chubu and Kansai airports, bypassing the staffed immigration counters. You can also carry the card on you in place of your passport, and it will suffice as identification if requested by authorities; the main exception is for tax-exempt shopping, for which both passport and card are required.
Most international flights arrive atNarita Airport(NRTIATA) orHaneda Airport(HNDIATA) nearTokyo, orKansai Airport(KIXIATA) nearOsaka. Many flights from major Asian cities also serveChubu Centrair Airport(NGOIATA) nearNagoya,Fukuoka Airport(FUKIATA) on Kyushu Island, andChitose Airport(CTSIATA) nearSapporo, Hokkaido Island.
Just about every sizable city has an airport although most only offer domestic flights and a few services toChina,South Korea, andTaiwan. Depending on the destination, transiting via a neighboring country can sometimes be cheaper and/or faster than via a major Japanese hub. For example, travelling toOkinawafromTaipeitakes 1.5 hours, compared to three hours from Tokyo.
Airports are generally easy to get through and not particularly crowded assuming you avoid the main holiday periods — namely New Year's (end of December–beginning of January), Golden Week (end of April–beginning of May), and Obon (mid-August), when things are more hectic and expensive.
Japan's two major airlines are flag carrierJapan Airlines[dead link](JAL, 日本航空nihon kōkū) andAll Nippon Airways(ANA, 全日本空輸zen nippon kūyu, or just 全日空zennikkū). Low-cost carriers have become popular with cheap domestic and international flights, and Narita is now a hub for low cost carriers, includingJetstar Japan,Skymark, andPeach.
There are international ferries to Japan from South Korea, and China. These are not always price competitive with air tickets, and also often have long travel times. As of January 2024, there are no regular ferries between Russia and Japan.
Japan has one of the world's best transport systems, and getting around is usually a breeze, with the train being overwhelmingly the most popular option. Trains are generally very punctual except during inclement weather or natural disasters. Travelling around Japan can be expensive, but there is a variety of passes that can be used to limit the damage.
For sorting through transport schedules and fares,NavitimeandHyperdiaare useful companions, although some features are limited to subscribers. Google Maps and Apple Maps can give detailed train and bus directions including platform numbers, but given the plethora of choices on popular routes it can be hard to filter results. You'll often have better results using apps like Jorudan'sJapan Transit Plannerto navigate the train system, then use Google or Apple for walking from the stations.
English timetables for long-distance trains are available on the websites ofJR Hokkaido,JR East,JR Central[dead link]andJR Kyushu. Timetables for the Tokaido, San'yo and Kyushu Shinkansen can also be viewed in English atTabi-o-ji.
Navitime and Tabi-o-ji offer options to exclude theNozomiandMizuhotrains from search results, which will benefit holders of the Japan Rail Pass. On Navitime, select the Japan Rail Pass option under Tourist Pass; on Tabi-o-ji, select to exclude Nozomi and Mizuho trains.
In most of Japan, addresses use a hierarchical scheme that's quite different from Western addresses. Mostroadshave no name; instead, cities are split into neighborhoods with names, which are divided into numbered districts (丁目chōme), which are subdivided into numbered street blocks. Addresses are written in order from largest to smallest; an example address ending in 名駅4丁目5-6 or 名駅4-5-6 would be the neighborhood of Meieki (名駅), district 4, block 5, house 6. (Addresses are usually written in English as "Meieki 4-5-6" or "4-5-6 Meieki", although the post office recommends the confusing "5-6 Meieki 4-chome".) Additional numbers may be appended for the floor or room number.
Numbering fordistricts, blocks, and housesis oftennotsequential; numbers are usually assignedchronologicallyas buildings are built, or based on distance from the city center. Small signs near street corners display the ward/neighborhood and district in Japanese (such as 名駅4丁目,Meieki 4-chōme); they often include the block number, but sometimes not, in which case the signs are very unhelpful since a district could be a dozen or more blocks. A building's entrance will usually show the block and house number (such as 5-6, sometimes written 5番6号), but not the district.
The lack of road names makes it difficult to give directions;mapsand especiallynavigation appsare a blessing in Japan. A minute spent checking a map can save you half an hour of aimlessly walking.
One of the first things any visitor to Japan should do is purchase a transportationIC card(交通系ICカードkoutsūkei ai shī kādo). IC cards can be used to pay for public transport and at convenience stores, vending machines and restaurants in all the major cities.
Public transport fares are calculated automatically no matter how complicated your journey or how often you transfer; just tap on and off at the start and end of your trip. IC cards are also accepted in lieu of paper tickets for some bullet trains when journeys are purchased online in advance.
Most railways support IC cards; simply tap your card on the turnstile as you go in, and do the same as you go out. Most buses support IC cards as well, but their usage depends on the bus; you either board via the front door and tap once to pay a flat fee, or you board via the back door and tap in and then alight via the front door and tap out.
IC cards sometimes give a small discount over cash payments. Children under 6 travel for free. Children between 6 and 11 are eligible for child (子供用kodomo-yō) cards entitling holders to half fares. Buying one requires ID, so bring the child's passport to a commuter pass office (定期券売り場) in any larger station.
Japan offers one of the most efficient rail transportation systems in the world, the crowning jewel of which is theShinkansen(新幹線), popularly known in English as thebullet train, the world's firsthigh-speed railline.
TheJapan Rail Passoffers — with a few exceptions — unlimited travel on all Japan Railway (JR) services including bullet trains, limited express and regular commuter trains.  This used to be an incredible bargain, but you need to travel alotto make this pay off now.  SeeRail travel in Japan#Japan Rail Passfor the pros and cons, and some sample computations on whether it's worth it.
There are also regional and local rail passes offered by the various JR companies (such as the JR East Rail Pass), as well as by the subway and private rail companies. Discount tickets are also sold, such as theSeishun 18 Ticket.
Japan's excellentShinkansennetwork means that flying is usually more of a luxury than a necessity. Flying remains, however, the most practical mode of reaching Japan's outlying islands, most notably for connections from the mainland toHokkaidoand/orOkinawa. Flying is also useful for getting around sparsely-populated Hokkaido, as the Shinkansen network there is limited.
Tokyo'sNarita Airporthandles a few domestic flights, but most domestic flights leave fromHaneda(HNDIATA) to the south of the city. Similarly, while there are some domestic flights fromKansai International Airport, more useItami(ITMIATA) to the north of Osaka, andKobe's airport also fields some flights. Narita–Haneda or Kansai–Itami is quite a trek, so allow 3-4 hr to transfer. Chubu, on the other hand, has many domestic flights and was built for easy interchange.
List prices for domestic flights are very expensive, but significant discounts are available if purchased in advance. Japan's largest carriers,Japan Airlines(JAL, 日本航空Nihon Kōkū) andAll Nippon Airways(ANA, 全日空Zennikkū) offer special fares where international visitors can fly domestic segments anywhere in the country at reduced rates. The most common discount ticket is called the Japan Explorer Pass (JAL) or the Experience Japan Fare (ANA), offer discounted economy fares. This is a particularly good deal for travel toHokkaidoor the remote southern islands ofOkinawa. Alternatively, the airlines offer a Welcome to Japan Fare (JAL) or Visit Japan Fare (ANA). If you reserve on the airlines' respective international websites, the offers for international travelers may be displayed as the cheapest ones, but if you try on the Japan website (in English and in yen), the regular discounts for a purchase in advance may be cheaper.
Low-cost carriers in Japan's domestic air market includeJetstar Japan,Peach Aviation,Fuji Dream Airlines,Skymark Airlines,StarFlyerandAir DO. Some of these airlines offer online bookings in English (Fuji Dream and StarFlyer do not). StarFlyer offers a discounted fare to foreigners on select routes. Their most basic offers may not include a checked baggage (which is sold as an option), and if you reserve via a third-party web site you may not be able to purchase the option.
ANA, JAL, and their subsidiaries offer a special standby card, theSkymate Card, to young passengers (up to the age of 22). With the card, passengers can fly standby at half of the full published fare, which is usually less than the equivalent express train fare. The card can be obtained from any JAL or ANA ticket counter with a passport-sized photo and a one-time fee.
Boats are a surprisingly uncommon means of transport, as all the major islands are linked together by bridges and tunnels. While there are some long-distance ferries linkingOkinawaandHokkaidoto the mainland, the fares are usually higher than discounted airline tickets and pretty much the sole advantage is that you can take your car with you.
For some smaller islands, boats may well be the only practical option. Hovercrafts and jet ferries are fast but expensive, with prices varying between ¥2000-5000 for an hour-long trip. Slow cargo boats are more affordable, a rule of thumb being ¥1000 per hour in second class, but departures are infrequent. There are also some inexpensive and convenient short-distance intercity ferries such as theAomori-Hakodateferry.
These boats are typically divided into classes, where second class (2等nitō) is just a giant expanse of tatami mat, first class (1等ittō) gets you a comfy chair or sleeping bunk in large shared room and only special class (特等tokutō) gets you a private cabin. Vending machines and simple restaurant fare are typically available on board, but on longer trips (particularly in second class) the primary means of entertainment is alcoholic—this can be fun if you're invited in, but less so if you're trying to sleep.
Local buses(路線バスrosen basu) are the norm in big cities and small towns. Bus fares are either fixed (you pay once, when entering or exiting the bus) or distance-based (you board the rear of the bus, grab a numbered ticket, and match the number with the fare displayed on a board at the front of the bus when it's time to get off). Many buses accept IC cards. Buses are indispensable in less-populated areas, and in cities such asKyotowhere there is not much local rail transit. The electronic board almost always includes a display and recorded voice announcements of the next stop — usually only in Japanese, although some cities (like Kyoto) make a welcome exception. However, if asked most drivers will be glad to tell you when you've reached your destination.
Highway buses(高速バスkōsoku basu; ハイウェイバスhaiwei basu) are plentiful in Japan, and are a major mode of intercity transportation and cheap alternative to rail travel, especially for overnight travel. Many companies have adopted a dynamic pricing model, where fares are based on the time of day, the type of seating on the bus, and how far in advance the ticket is purchased.
Major operators of highway buses include theWiller Express,Japan Bus Lines,Keio Bus, and theJR Group. Regional transit operators also operate long-distance buses. Tickets for such buses can be purchased online (probably the cheapest option), at the point of departure (at a surcharge), or, with a command of some Japanese, at convenience stores. Most companies offer online reservations in English and several other languages.
Airport busesaka limousine buses (リムジンバスrimujin basu) travel from major train stations and hotels to airports. Such buses also travel frequently to their own terminals in the city.
You will find taxis everywhere in Japan, not only in the city but also in the country. Taxis are clean and completely safe, though a bit expensive. But sometimes, they are the only way to get where you are going. Taxi meters are strictly regulated and clearly visible to the passenger. If you are not sure if you have enough money for the trip, your driver may be able to guess the approximate cost of a trip beforehand. If you get a cost estimate beforehand, some taxi drivers will stop the meter at the estimated price regardless of how much further the destination may be. Taxi fares are higher at night. Tipping is not customary and would most likely be refused.
In the city, you can hail a taxi just about anywhere, but outside train stations and other transfer points you should board at a taxi stand. (The taxi stand will usually either have a long line of patient passengers, or a long line of idle taxis.) If the destination is a well-known location, such as a hotel, train station, or public facility, the name alone should be enough. Even in the major cities, you are very unlikely to encounter a taxi driver who can speak English, so carrying a pamphlet or card of your hotel or destination with the address on it can be very helpful. Likewise, have staff at your hotel write down the names and addresses of places you want to visit in Japanese to show your taxi driver.
Calling for a taxi using asmartphone appis available in many cities. These apps will provide the approximate fare, although trips are still charged by the meter and can fluctuate. Many taxi companies will add a fee for immediate phone or app hails; this booking charge is higher for taxis reserved in advance. Some taxi companies offer fixed-fare rides for smartphone hails. The largest player isGO, which has an English-language app. Some alternatives available in major cities and accessible in English include Uber and Didi.
In Japanese taxis, the driver controls the opening and closing of the rear left passenger door. Try to avoid closing your door when you board the taxi. Taxi drivers have a reputation for speeding and aggressive driving, but there are very few accidents involving bad drivers.
All licensed taxis in Japan have green license plates. Illegal cabs will have standard white or yellow plates and should be avoided.
Uber andDidiare available in major cities, but they can only be used to book taxis and limousines, and charge a premium for the convenience. The premium may still be worth it, since they make navigation much easier. Starting in April 2024 the Japanese government is planning to allow limited ride-sharing services, but under the supervision of taxi companies instead of companies such as Uber.
Rental cars and driving in Japan are rare in or around the major cities, as public transport is generally excellent and gets you almost everywhere. In addition, the roads of major cities like Tokyo are plagued with massive traffic jams and parking is expensive and difficult to find, so driving there is more of a hindrance than anything else. However, many rural areas can really only be explored with your own transport, so driving should certainly not be dismissed out of hand, especially onHokkaido. Often the most feasible option is to combine the two: take the train out to the countryside and then pick up a rental car at a station. JR'sEkirenhas outlets at most larger train stations and often has discounted train & car packages.
An international driver's license, Japanese license or translated national license will be required if you wish to rent a car or drive in Japan, and must be carried at all times. See themain articlefor details. Driving is on the left.
Japan has many greatcycling routes. Rentals can be found throughout the country, especially near popular routes like theShimanami Kaido Bikeway. Even very rural roads are well paved, but as Japan is quite mountainous, you will need your lowest climbing gear a lot.
In cities, it is a great idea to use a bicycle to get around, explore the city and see your sights.
Japan is an excellent country for hitchhiking, although some Japanese language ability is highly recommended. SeeHitchhiking in Japanfor a more detail and practical tips for this.
Though the cramped cities and older buildings present many barriers to those with disabilities and other mobility issues, Japan is a verywheelchair accessiblecountry. Japan has switched into high-gear to create a "barrier-free" society.
The vast majority of train and subway stations are wheelchair accessible. Anyone who needs special assistance can inform station staff at the ticketing gates and will be guided to the train and helped off the train at a station. Most trains and local buses (but not long-distance buses) have priority seats (優先席yūsenseki). The Shinkansen generally does not, but you can always reserve a seat (for a fee, or for free with a Japan Rail Pass). On a wheelchair, you can park in the hallway between cars, reserve a wheelchair seat (which are limited; JR recommends booking 2 days in advance, and you should keep your travel times flexible), or reserve a private room.
The major tourist attractions are partially adapted generally provide some sort of accessible route. While discounts are available for those with disabilities, disability identification cards not issued in Japan may not be accepted.
Hotels with wheelchair-accessible rooms can be hard to find and are often labeled "barrier free" (バリアフリーbaria furii) or "universal" (ユニバーサルyunibāsaru) instead of "accessible". Even if an accessible room is available, most hotels require booking via phone or email.
The Japanese were also a nation of castle-builders. In the feudal days, you could find several castles in nearly every prefecture. Because of bombings in World War II, fires, edicts to tear down castles, etc. only 12 of Japan's castles are original, meaning that their main keeps or donjons (天守閣tenshukaku) date back to the Edo Period or earlier. Four of them are on the island of Shikoku, two just north in the Chugoku region, two in Kansai, three in the Chubu region, and one in the northern Tohoku region.
Theoriginal castlesare:
Japan also has manyreconstructed castles, many of which receive more visitors than the originals. The donjons of these castles have been rebuilt in modern times. However, other structures may be original. For example,Nagoya Castle's southeast, southwest, and northwest turrets all date back to the castle's original construction. Okinawa'sShuri Castleis unique among Japan's castles, because it is not a Japanese castle; it was the royal palace of the Ryukyu Kingdom and built in a distinctive Ryukyuan architectural style, with a much stronger Chinese influence than Japanese-style castles.
Ruinstypically feature only the castle walls or parts of the original layout are visible. Although they lack the structures of reconstructed castles, ruins often feel more authentic without the concrete reconstructions that sometimes feel too commercial and touristy. Many ruins maintain historical significance, and some have original structures that are still standing. One of the most notable ones isKyoto's Nijo Castle, which is not listed as an original because its main keep burnt down and was not reconstructed, but the palace buildings that served as the lord's residence are among the finest and best preserved in all of Japan.
Japan is famous for its gardens, known for its unique aesthetics both in landscape gardens and Zen rock/sand gardens. The nation has designated an official "Top Three Gardens", based on their beauty, size, authenticity (gardens that have not been drastically altered), and historical significance. Those gardens areKairakueninMito,KenrokueninKanazawa, andKorakueninOkayama. The largest garden, and the favorite of many travellers, is actuallyRitsurin ParkinTakamatsu.
Rock and sand gardens can typically be found in temples, specifically those of Zen Buddhism. The most famous of these isRyoanji TempleinKyoto, but such temples can be found throughout Japan. Moss gardens are also popular in Japan andKoke-dera, also in Kyoto, has one of the nation's best.
Pure Land gardens dating back to the Heian Period were built to represent the Buddhist Paradise. They all feature a large central pond in front of the Amida Hall. They're simplistic to such an extent that those who are unaware would not likely even view them as gardens at all. The Byodoin Temple inUji, Motsuji Temple inHiraizumi, and Joruriji Temple inKizugawaare among the most famous of those that remain.
Regardless of your travel interests, it's difficult to visit Japan without at least seeing a few shrines and temples. Buddhist and Shinto sites are the most common, although there are some noteworthy spiritual sites of other religions, as well.
Buddhismhas had a profound impact on Japan ever since it was introduced in the 6th century. Like shrines, temples can be found in every city, and many different sects exist. Some temples also offermeditation classesin English.
Some of the holiest sites are made up of large complexes on mountaintops and includeMount Koya(Japan's most prestigious place to be buried and head temple of Shingon Buddhism),Mount Hiei(set here when Kyoto became the capital to remove Buddhism from politics, the head of the Tendai sect of Buddhism), andMount Osore(considered to be the "Gateway to Hell", it features many monuments and graves in a volcanic wasteland).
Many of the nation's head temples are located inKyoto, like the Honganji Temples and Chion-in Temple. Kyoto also has five of the top Zen temples named in the "Five Mountain System" (Tenryuji, Shokokuji, Kenninji, Tofukuji, and Manjuji), along withNanzenji Temple, which sits above all the temples outside of the mountain system. Kamakura also has its own five: Kenchoji, Engakuji, Jufukuji, Jochiji, and Jomyoji Temples.Eiheiji Templeis also a prominent Zen temple, although it was never part of the mountain system.
Nara'sTodaiji TempleandKamakura'sKotokuin Templeare famous for their large Buddhist statues. Todaiji's is the largest in the nation, while the Kamakura Daibutsu is the second largest, meditating outside in the open air.
Horyuji TempleinHoryuji, just south of Nara, is the world's oldest wooden structure. The beautifulPhoenix HallinUjiis seen on the back of the ¥10 coin.
Shinto is the "native" religion of Japan, so those looking to experience things that are "wholly Japanese" should particularly enjoy Shinto shrines as they truly embody the Japanese aesthetic. The holiest Shinto shrine is theGrand Ise Shrine, while the second holiest isIzumo Shrine, where the gods gather annually for a meeting. Other famous holy shrines includeItsukushima ShrineinMiyajima,Toshogu ShrineinNikko, theKumano Sanzan, and theDewa Sanzan,Meiji ShrineinTokyo, andShimogamo Shrine,Kamigamo Shrine, andFushimi Inari ShrineinKyoto.
Japan's introduction to Christianity came in 1549 by way of the Portuguese and Saint Francis Xavier. He established the first Christian church inYamaguchiat Daidoji Temple, whose ruins are now part ofXavier Memorial Park, and the Xavier Memorial Church was built in his honor. When Toyotomi Hideyoshi came into power, Christianity was banned and Christians were persecuted. InNagasaki, 26 Japanese Christians were crucified. There is a memorial for these martyrs in the city, and theOura Church, the oldest church left in the nation, built in 1864.
TheShimabara Rebellion, a Christian uprising, led to the ousting of the Portuguese and Catholic practices from Japan, along with approximately 37,000 beheadings of Christians and peasants. InShimabara, you can visit the ruins of Hara Castle, where the Christians gathered and were attacked.Oyano'sAmakusa Shiro Memorial Hallexplains the Shimabara Rebellion and the persecution of Christians. When the nation reopened, Christianity was still not legal and Christians were tortured. You can see one of these sites atMaria CathedralinTsuwano.
You can often find Christian objects in temples and shrines because many of these objects were hidden there when Christianity was forbidden.
Japan has a handful of well-known Confucian temples. As Japan's gateway to the world for many centuries,Nagasaki's Confucian Temple is the only one in the world to be built by Chinese outside of China.Yushima SeidoinTokyowas a Confucian school and one of the nation's first institutes of higher education. The first integrated school in the nation, theShizutani SchoolinBizenalso taught based on Confucian teachings and principles. The schoolhouse was modeled after Chinese architectural styles. The first public school inOkinawawas a Confucian school given to the Ryukyuan Kingdom along with theShiseibyo Confucian Temple.
Sefa Utaki, a World Heritage Site, is one of the most famous sites of the Okinawan religion. Many Okinawan spiritual ceremonies were held here.Asumuiin Kongo Sekirinzan Park is a large rock formation believed to be the oldest land in the area. As a religious site, shaman used to come here to speak with the gods.
The three must-visit places for World War II buffs areHiroshima,Nagasaki, and the main island ofOkinawa. Okinawa is where some of the most brutal battles occurred between Japan and the United States, and the area is crawling with remnants from its dark past. The Peace Park, Prefectural Peace Museum, Himeyuri Peace Museum, and the Peace Memorial Hall inItomanare some of the best places to learn more, see artifacts, and hear accounts of the battles that took place here.
Hiroshima and Nagasaki are important sites in many ways. Hiroshima is the first city ever to be attacked by an atomic bomb, as well as the deadliest. After Hiroshima was devastated, the bombing of Nagasaki days later led the Japanese to surrender, ending the war. Even those who are not particularly interested in World War II may find the atomic bomb sites interesting, as issues surrounding nuclear weapons and the threat of nuclear war remain a concern. Fifty-eight other places (including Tokyo, of course) were bombed, as well, so there are lesser-known memorials in those cities.
U.S. citizens (only) can take a tour to visitIwo Jima.
TheUNESCO World Heritage site"Sites of Japan’s Meiji Industrial Revolution: Iron and Steel, Shipbuilding and Coal Mining" is made up of 23 sites around the country, most of them inChugokuandKyushu. These are places like mines, railways, ironworks and ports from the Meiji era, which are among the most notable of Japan's first Western-style industrial sites. Separately listed is the silk mill ofTomioka.
Japan, duringfeudal times, was dominated by a system of clans, including thesamurai, a hereditary warrior caste. Sites of nobility dating to the pre-industrial era can be found across the island country.
It shouldn't be surprising that in a country where more than 70% of the terrain is forests and mountains,outdoor activitiesabound.Hikingis very traditional and popular in Japan. You can find many small trails across the country, and plenty of rugged terrain in Japan's many national parks. Hikes can also be part of a spiritual experience, such as climbing the 2446 stone steps of the holyHaguromountain through an amazing primeval forest.
Ascending one of Japan's manymountainsis within the capabilities of any traveller. You can reach the summit of some mountains almost entirely by car, or with only a short easy walk.Mount Asois one of the world's largest volcanic calderas, and a paved road brings cars and pedestrians right up to the summit. Or, you can take the ropeway, which was promoted as the world's first ropeway over an active volcano.
Around 300,000 people every year climbMount Fuji, a mountain famous as an icon of Japan. On the most popular route, you will need to use your hands for support, but no actual climbing is required; you can easily climb Fuji with just adequate clothing, some basic gear (sunscreen, headlamp, etc.), and 1–2 days in your itinerary. It's easily doable if you're not too out of shape.
With its snowy mountainous terrain, Japan is an excellent destination forskiing and snowboarding. Japan's climate means that many ski resorts getexcellentpowder, and a lot of it: on average, resorts in theJapanese Alpsget10m (33ft)andHokkaidoslopes get a whopping14m (46ft)or more! Skiing in Japan can be inexpensive compared to other countries, with cheaper lift tickets, budget accommodation, and cheap meals. Rental gear is reasonably priced, but as Japanese on average have smaller feet, you should consider bringing your own boots. The easiest way to get to many slopes is to take public transit (rail and buses), and ship your ski/snowboard gear to the slopes (see§Courier services).
Golfis popular with the Japanese. Golf courses are typically 1–2 hours' drive outside the city. (Shuttles from the nearest train station are often available with a reservation.) Midweek prices can be found starting at ¥6,000. Expect it to take the whole day, with travel time, a round of golf, and relaxing in a hot bath afterwards. Since most players are local businessmen, singles are not allowed on most courses (so make sure you have at least two players), and rental equipment will have a limited selection (you can ship your clubs and shoes to the range cheaply; see§Courier services).
Japan is not really known for itsbeaches, with the notable exception of subtropicalOkinawa. Japanese cities (many of which are coastal) often expand right up to the coast line. Where there are beaches, they tend to only be visited in summer; as soon as 1 September comes, lifeguards stop patrolling the beaches, and Japanese beachgoers disappear as a result.Surfingis somewhat popular, as the surf can be very good on both coasts during typhoon season (Aug-Oct) on the Pacific coast, and during winter on the Sea of Japan coast. There are also some excellent spots forsnorkelinganddiving, with the manta rays and hammerheads of Okinawa at the top of the list. Aside from marine life, corals, and World War II wrecks, you can also visitSusami, outsideKushimoto, and send your friends a postcard from the world's deepest underwater mailbox, 10 meters underwater.
While boating and river sports are not very common, a few fun activities can be found, such as going river rafting in some of the last wild rivers in Japan in theIya Valley.
Baseball(野球yakyū) is hugely popular, and is played in many high schools and by professionals. SeeBaseball#Japanfor details.
Soccer(サッカーsakkā) plays second fiddle to baseball. The top men's league is the Japan Professional Football League, and there is a professional women's league, the Japan Women's Professional Football League.
Basketball(バスケットボール,basuketto bōruor バスケbasuke). The professional league, "B-league", has 24 teams in B1 division and 14 teams in B2 division as of 2024.
Sumo wrestling(相撲sumō) is a popular Japanese sport. The biggest events are the sixhonbasho(本場所, "main tournaments") throughout the year.Professional wrestling(プロレスpuroresu) is also very popular.
Horse racing(競馬keiba) is a big business in Japan, and one of the few forms of legal gambling. TheJapan Cup, held annually atFuchu's Tokyo Racecourse, is one of the premier events on the international horse racing calendar.
TheJapan Golf Tourtournaments are played on numerous courses throughout Japan.
Karaoke(カラオケ) was invented in Japan and can be found in virtually every Japanese city. Pronouncedkah-rah-oh-keh, it is abbreviated from the words "empty orchestra" in Japanese; most locals won't have any idea what you're talking about if you use the Englishcarry-oh-kee. Most karaoke places occupy several floors of a building. You and your friends have a room to yourself — no strangers involved — and the standard hourly rate often includes all-you-can-drink alcohol, with refills ordered through a phone on the wall or through the karaoke machine. The major chains all have excellent English-language song selections. Old folks prefer singingenkaballads at small neighborhood bars.
You operate the karaoke machine yourself. It lets you queue up songs to be played in order. (At 4 minutes per song, 15 songs would keep you singing for an hour.) These days, many machines use a tablet or touchscreen which you can use to search for songs by a variety of criteria; if you can get one of these set to English, great. You can also look up songs in the phonebook-sized catalogs, which is what you'll have to do if you can't get a tablet in English, or at older places that just have a large remote control. Once you find the song's 4- to 6-digit number, aim the remote at the karaoke machine like a TV remote, type in the number (it will appear on the screen, so you can check that it was entered correctly; if not press 戻る to go back), and press 転送 or "send" to confirm and add it to the queue.
Also ubiquitous arepachinkoparlors. Pachinko (パチンコ) is a form of gambling that involves dropping little steel balls into a machine; more balls are awarded depending on where they land. The air inside most pachinko parlors is hot and sweaty, with ear-splitting noise. (Legally you can only trade the balls for prizes, but gamblers always opt for "special prize" (特殊景品tokushu keihin) tokens which they sell back for cash at a separate booth elsewhere in the building or in a nearby alley. Because the booth is off-site, it's a separate business and therefore not illegal.) Even in a declining market, nearly 10% of all Japanese — mostly middle-age businessmen — play at least once a week, and pachinko generates more gambling revenue than Las Vegas, Macau, and Singapore combined.
Video arcades(ゲームセンターgēmu sentā, or ビデオ・アーケードbideo ākēdo; don't confuse with a regularākēdowhich means "shopping arcade/street"), though sometimes difficult to distinguish from pachinko parlors from the outside, have arcade games rather than gambling, and are often several floors high. Video games are the norm here, although you may be surprised at the variety of games. Aside from the usual action and fighting games, there are also rhythm games such asDance Dance Revolutionor the much easier for beginnersTaiko Drum Master(太鼓の達人Taiko no Tatsujin), difficult-to-define oddities such asDerby Owners Club(which can only be described as a "multiplayer online card-collecting role-playing horse-racing simulator"), and bizarre inventions likeChō Chabudai-Gaeshi!(超・ちゃぶ台返し! "Super Table-Flip!") where you literally bang on a table and flip it over angrily to relieve stress while racking up points. Game centers usually also have non-video games, which almost always includeclaw crane games(クレーンゲームkurēn gēmu) where you can win anything from stuffed animals and trinkets to expensive smartphones and jewelry, and sophisticatedphoto sticker booths(プリクラpuri-kura, shortened from the brand name Print Club).
Japan's national game isGo(囲碁igo, or just 碁go), a strategy board game. While the rules are simple, the strategy and tactics are very complex. On a sunny day, the Tennoji ward ofOsakais a good place to join a crowd watching two Go masters go at it.
Another popular board game in Japan isshogi(将棋shōgi) or Japanese chess. The general mechanics are similar to Westernchess, but shogi a much more complex and dynamic game than Western chess.
Mahjong(麻雀mājan) is also relatively popular in Japan, and frequently features in Japanese video and arcade games, although it's associated with illegal gambling, and mahjong parlors can be quite seedy. Mahjong uses tiles with a variety of Chinese symbols and characters. Players draw and discard tiles trying to complete a hand with particular sets of tiles (typically, four sets of either three identical tiles or three in a straight flush, plus one identical pair). While gameplay is similar, scoring is drastically different from the various Chinese versions.
The Japanese lovemusic(音楽ongaku) in all styles.
Traditional Japanese music(邦楽hōgaku) uses a variety of instruments, many of which originated in China, but developed into unique forms after being introduced to Japan. The most common instruments are theshamisen(三味線, a 3-string picked or plucked instrument), theshakuhachi(尺八, a bamboo flute), and thekoto(箏, a 13-string picked zither).Taiko(太鼓) are drums that are unique to Japan, and range in size from small handheld drums to enormous1.8-metre (5.9ft)stationary drums.Taikoalso refers to the performances, which are very common at festivals. Outside of traditional Japanese music, these instruments are not frequently used.
Western classical music(クラシック[音楽]kurashikku [ongaku]) is moderately popular in Japan with people of all ages. There are 1,600 professional and amateur orchestras (オーケストラōkesutora) in Japan; Tokyo is home to nearly half of them, includingeightfull-time professional orchestras. There are also well over 10,000 choirs (合唱gasshō, コーラスkōrasuor クワイアkuwaia); theJapan Choral Associationhas more information.
With the arrival of Western pop music in the 20th century, Japan created its own forms of pop music. These have largely died out except forenka(演歌), sentimental ballads in Western pop styles composed to resemble traditional Japanese music, typically sung in an exaggerated emotional style.
Jazz(ジャズjazu) has been very popular in Japan since the 1930s.Jazz coffee shopsare a common way to listen to jazz.
J-popandJ-rockflood the airwaves. Punk, heavy metal, hip hop, electronic, and many other genres also find niches in Japan where they get their own Japanese interpretation. J-pop is often associated withidols(アイドルaidoru), young music stars manufactured by talent agencies. Although many are one-hit wonders, quite a few idol groups turn into long-lasting acts: SMAP and Morning Musume have been popular for decades, while AKB48 has rocketed to the top to become the best-selling female group in Japan, with offshoots in other Asian countries as well. However, these are also controversial as aspiring singers are made to sign contracts that give them little control over their personal lives, including a ban on dating to maintain the illusion of "availability" to their fans.
Concerts(ライブraibu, "live") are easy to find. Depending on the event, you may be able to buy tickets at convenience stores (using a numeric code to identify the right concert), online, at record stores, or in various pre-sale lotteries. (Some sellers may require you to have a Japanese credit card with a Japanese billing address, so you may need to try multiple methods to find one you can use.) You can buy day-of tickets at the venue, assuming the concert isn't sold out, but large venues may not even sell tickets at the door. Rather than doing general admission, tickets may be numbered to divide the audience into smaller groups which are admitted in order.Music festivals(ロック・フェスティバルrokku fesutibaru, shortened to ロックフェスrokku fesuor just フェスfesu) are also popular, drawing tens of thousands of people.Fuji Rock Festivalis Japan's largest festival, and covers many genres.Rock In Japan Festivalis the biggest festival where only Japanese artists are allowed to perform.
The most well-known types of traditional Japanese performing arts originated in medieval or pre-modern Japan, and feature melodramatic period stories of historical events, romance, or moral conflicts. While the old Japanese language they use can be off-putting, an important part of these art forms is theintricate visual aspectsof their traditional costumes and emotional expressiveness.
Bunraku(文楽) is a type of puppet theater. An actor and two stagehands precisely control each puppet, while a narrator performs the exposition and all dialogue with improvisedshamisenaccompaniment.
Kabuki(歌舞伎) is a popular type of dance-drama. It's known for the elaborate costumes and makeup that performers wear.Kabukitells its stories through the expressions and dances. Actors fly above the audience on wires and make dramatic entrances and exits via aisles down the middle of the audience, complex revolving stages, and trap doors.
Noh(能nōor 能楽nōgaku) is an older type of musical drama. Minimalist and probably boring for the average visitor, noh uses wooden masks and stark movements on identical bare sets, and tells its emotional stories through the lyrics, which are in an old form of Japanese (difficult for even native speakers to understand). It's sometimes described as "Japanese opera", although it's closer to chanted poetry rather than actual singing.
Traditionally used as comic intermission between acts in a noh play,kyōgen(狂言) consists of short (10 minute) plays, often using stock characters such as servants and their master, or a farmer and his son.
Much less well-known istaishū engeki(大衆演劇), a vague term meaning "theater for the masses" or "popular theater". Superficially, it's similar to kabuki, with elaborate Edo-period costumes, but the melodrama is turned all the way up. Every performance is a new tale, as these plays arenotscripted, but invented during the morning's rehearsal; the simple stories are easy to understand even without a translation, with the good guys obviously triumphing over the bad guys. The second half showcases actors mostly solo performing traditional dances with modern flashing stage lights and fog machines. You may find these accessible shows to have cultural similarities to variety shows, revues, or even drag shows.
Comedyin Japan is markedly different from the Western style. Japanese are very sensitive about making jokes at the expense of others, so Western-style stand-up comedy isn't very common. Most Japanese comedy relies on absurdity, non sequiturs, and breaking the strict social expectations. Most Japanese also love puns and wordplay (駄洒落dajare), although these can cross the line into groan-inducingoyaji gyagu(親父ギャグ "old man jokes"). Don't bother attempting irony or sarcasm; Japanese rarely use these, and they're likely to take your statement at face value instead.
Japan is also home to various types of minimalist solo storytelling such asrakugo(落語),kōdan(講談) andrōkyoku(浪曲). All these, as well as numerous other genres, are often performed at traditional vaudeville-like theatres calledyose(寄席).
Japan is famous forgeisha, although they're often misunderstood by the West. Literally translated, the word 芸者 (geisha) means "artist" or "artisan". Geisha areentertainers, whether you're looking for song and dance, party games, or just some nice company and conversation. Geisha train from a young age to be exquisite, high-class entertainers. They're often employed today by businesses for parties and banquets. Although traditionally expensive and exclusive, you may be able to see geisha perform for as little as ¥3,000, or for free at a festival. In the largest Japanese cities, it's easy to spot a geisha if you look in the right part of town.
Tea ceremony(茶道sadōorchadō) is not unique to Japan, or even to Asia, but the Japanese version stands out for its deep connection to Japanese aesthetics. The focus of a Japanese tea ceremony is not so much the tea as making guests feel welcome and appreciating the season. Due to the influence of Zen Buddhism, Japanese tea ceremony emphasizes a uniquely Japanese aesthetic calledwabi-sabi(侘寂). A very rough translation might be thatwabiis "rustic simplicity" andsabiis "beauty that comes with age and wear". There aretea housesacross Japan where you can be a guest at a tea ceremony. The most common type of "informal" ceremony usually takes 30 minutes to an hour; a "formal" ceremony can take up to 4 hours.
Japan is also well-known for itsmartial arts, with judo (柔道jūdō) and karate (空手) being the best known ones internationally. There are opportunities to spar with Japanese opponents while you are visiting, but you may need to make arrangements through your home dojo, and you may also watch competitions and performances. There are also other internationally lesser-known martial arts you might want to explore while in Japan such as aikido (合気道)  and kendo (剣道).
Japanese pop culture is famous the world over, with anime, manga and video games in particular having been exported to the West with great success. However, while you are visiting, it is worth checking out some genres that are not as well-known outside Japan. One such genre is calledtokusatsu(特撮), which are live action films or television series that make heavy use of special effects. Famous examples oftokusatsuinclude Godzilla, Ultraman, Super Sentai (which served as the inspiration for Power Rangers in the U.S.) and the less internationally known Kamen Rider.
Japan has an estimated 200,000festivals(祭matsuri) throughout the year. Festivals are held for a variety of reasons, the most common being to give thanks (e.g. for a successful rice harvest) and bring good fortune. Although most festivals are small events sponsored by local shrines or temples, there are hundreds that are large city-wide affairs, any of which would be a nice addition to your itinerary if they overlap your schedule.
The main event at many large festivals is aparade of floats, which are usually lifted and carried by hand by several dozen men. Often a shrine'skami(spirit/deity) will be ritually put in a portable shrine (mikoshi) and carried around the neighborhood as part of the parade. At some festivals, anyone can take a turn helping to carry a float for a few minutes.Fireworks(花火hanabi) are also a common event at festivals, particularly in the summer; in Japan, this is the most common use of fireworks. The rest of the time is spent enjoying the booths and entertainment. Food stalls havetraditional festival foodsliketakoyaki, shaved ice (かき氷kakigōri), and skewered hot dogs. A traditional game at festivals isgoldfish scooping(金魚すくいkingyo sukui): if you can catch a goldfish using the flimsy paper scoop, you get to keep it. Other common games include ring toss and cork guns.
Festivals are a time for the neighborhood and community to come out and celebrate together, whether it's a family, young couples making a date of it, or just a group of friends. Nearly everyone will put on a colorfulyukata(浴衣) robe, while many of the people working at the festival wearhappi(法被) coats. (Street clothes are perfectly fine, too.)
The JNTO website has alist of several dozen festivals throughout the yearin English. Some of the most well-known festivals are:
There are also several nationwide festivals:
Some local festivals are more eccentric.Hari Kuyō("needle memorial") festivals are held throughout Japan to express thanks to old or broken needles and pins.Hadaka("naked") festivals are actually common throughout Japan, but the most well-known one is theEyō Hadakamatsuri (会陽裸祭り) at Saidai-ji inOkayama. Thousands of men wearing just loincloths scramble to catch lucky sacred items thrown into the crowd, which will bring them a year of happiness.Naki Zumō(泣き相撲, "crying sumo") festivals throughout Japan have competitions where two sumo wrestlers holding babies see which baby will cry first as priests provoke them by making faces and putting on masks. And theKanamaramatsuri (かなまら祭り) inKawasakiis famous for celebrating the male genitalia.
As a nation made of volcanic islands, it's not surprising that in Japanhot springs(温泉onsen) are commonplace. Japanese have pondered for centuries what the best hot springs in the country are, and they've come up withquite a few. Bathing is a big deal in Japan, and be it a sceniconsenhot spring, a neighborhoodsentōbath or just an ordinary household tub, bathing Japanese style is a pleasure. Whereas a Western "bath" is used for washing in, "baths" in Japan are for soaking and relaxing, more like a hot tub. Washing is done first outside the tub.
Onsenare the pinnacle of the Japanese bathing experience. Clusters of hot springinnspop up wherever there's a suitable source of hot water. The most memorable onsen experience is often therotenburo(露天風呂):outdoor bathswith views of the surrounding natural scenery.
While most onsen are run commercially and charge fees for entry, especially in remote areas there are free publicly maintained baths that offer minimal facilities, but, more often than not, stunning views to make up for it. To find those off the beaten track inns, check out theJapan Association of Secluded Hot Spring Inns(日本秘湯を守る会Nihon hitō o mamoru kai), which has 185 independent lodges throughout the country.
Sentō(銭湯) are public bath houses found in any large city. Intended for people without their own home tub, they are typically quite utilitarian and are slowly dying out. Some, however, have gone upmarket and turned into "spas" (スパsupa), which are public baths for stressed-out salarymen, often with a capsule hotel (see§Sleep) bolted on the side. As you might expect, these come in varying degrees of legitimacy — beware any place advertising "esthe", "health", or "soap"—but most are surprisingly decent.
Foreign visitors typically visit hot springs by stopping at aryokan, a traditional Japanese inn, some of which feature hot springs as one of their main attractions (the other main attraction usually being the elaboratekaisekimeals). This requires some research and planning to decide where you want to go (most ryokan are in small towns in the country) and to fit it into your schedule. But don't focus exclusively on inns; many onsen have no lodging, making them cheap and quick to stop at, although many are hard to get to without a car or bicycle.
Many onsen and sento prohibit the entry of visitors withtattoos. Intended to keep outyakuzagangsters (who often sport full-back tattoos), the rule is usually applied with a modicum of common sense, but heavily tattooed visitors will, at the very least, receive curious looks and may be asked to leave.
Japanese are understanding of the funny ways of foreigners, but there's one rule where no exceptions are made: you have towash yourselfand rinse off all foambeforeentering the bath. Baths in Japan are generally usednaked, although you can instead use private baths (by reservation or attached to your room, usually at an extra cost) or stay clothed in a foot bath. It is a major faux pas to let your towel touch the bath water, so you cannot use one to cover your privates for modesty; either leave it to the side or do as the locals do and wrap it around your hair. If you have long hair, make sure you tie it up neatly before entering the bath.
Super sentōsare sentos that offer additional services beyond regular sentōs, often similar to spa treatments. They often have multiple baths, saunas, relaxation rooms and sometimes even a restaurant. Most establishments open until 23:00–01:00, while some stay open until 02:30, and there are even a few that open for 24 hours.
As of January 2025:
Exchange rates fluctuate. Current rates for these and other currencies are available fromXE.com
The Japanese currency is theJapanese yen, abbreviated ¥ (orJPYin foreign exchange contexts). The symbol 円 (pronounceden) is used in the Japanese language.
Cash is available in the following forms:
Prices in Japan are almost always listed using Western numerals, withJapanese numeralsonly occasionally spotted in places like high-end restaurants.  The main exception is that large sums are sometimes abbreviated with 万 (man, 10,000), so 5万円 is 50,000 yen.
For easy cash withdrawal,ATMs(ē tī emu), also known as "cash corners" (キャッシュコーナーkyasshu kōnā), are ubiquitous in Japan and can be found at most convenience stores and train stations. Oddly, some close at night or on weekends, although this restriction is slowly going away. Also, at night the additionally charged fee might be higher. While not all banks accept foreign cards, most of the large banks including Japan Post, Mizuho, SMBC and Aeon do. SeeShopping in Japanfor the full list. A particularly convenient option for travelers is7-Eleven BankATMs, which can be found in every branch of 7-Eleven and are usually open 24/7.
Most ATMs charge ¥110 or ¥220 for withdrawals, which is added on top of the amount you withdraw when invoicing the final amount to your bank. Aeon Bank is the only one that doesn't charge a fee for any Visa/MasterCard withdrawals. E-net (found in most FamilyMarts) has started charging ¥660, so try to avoid them. If you can, withdraw ¥50,000 or ¥100,000 at a time to minimize the fee impact.
Dealing with physical bank branches is notoriously cumbersome and best avoided. If you need to exchange cash, dedicated money changers are faster and offer better rates, but can be hard to find outside major airports and the like. If you need a locally-issued credit card (for an online service that performs region checks, for instance), there are a multitude of online-only virtual Visa cards available, and prepaid Visa gift cards can be purchased from major convenience store chains. If you're actually living in Japan and need to set up a bank account or get a Japanese credit card, seeWorking in Japan#Money.
Quite a few restaurants, small shops and even some lodgings only accept cash, particularly in smaller towns and more isolated areas. You should carry enough cash, or check that your preferred payment method is accepted in advance.
Some coin lockers, laundries and beach showers only accept ¥100 coins and some change machines may only accept ¥1,000 bills. Additionally, some machines have not been calibrated to support the new bills introduced in 2024. If you see a sign with phrasing like "新1000円未対応" ("new ¥1,000 bill not yet supported"), "新紙幣は使えません" ("new bills can not be used") or an image of the new bills crossed out, you will need to change your bills for old ones.
Always keep a sizable stack of reserve money. If you run out for any reason (wallet stolen, credit card blocked, etc.) it can be difficult to have any wired to you. Western Union has a very limited presence even in the larger metropolitan areas. American Express cardholders have more emergency options: the AmEx office in Tokyo can print replacement cards for same-day pickup, and have the ability to send emergency funds to certain locations around the country if needed.
Credit cards are widely accepted, but some cafes, bars, and restaurants may still only accept cash and/or IC card. Visa, MasterCard and JCB are widely accepted. Discover and American Express are usable where JCB credit cards are accepted.
There are two types of payment machine in Japan:
Look for the EMV/FeliCa machines displaying the international contactless logoand say "touch" (タッチtacchi) to pay with your foreign credit card.
Smart cards are a popular means of payment and are locally known as "IC" cards (meaning "integrated circuit"). IC cards can be used to pay for public transport, and for goods and services at convenience stores, vending machines and numerous restaurants in all the major cities. There are many different brands of IC card to choose from.
The most common cards are JR East'sSuicaand the Tokyo areaPASMO, both of which can be purchased for ¥500 at train stations in Tokyo. The cards are completely interchangeable, but Suica charges a small fee for a refund (¥220), while PASMO does not. The cards can be recharged at train stations and convenience stores. The cards can store up to ¥20,000 worth of value.Welcome Suicais a Suica card targeted at tourists. The card is available at Narita and Haneda airports and major train stations in Tokyo, no deposit required. The card can be recharged at the same places as the regular Suica but expires after 28 days and cannot be refunded.
IC cards of other regions, such as Kansai'sICOCAor Chubu'sTOICA, can be used interchangeably with Suica and PASMO. However, IC cards can only be refunded in the same region from which they were purchased. An exception is TOICA, which can be refunded at JR Central's shinkansen ticket offices in Tokyo (Tokyo station or Shinagawa station), Yokohama (Shin-Yokohama station), Kyoto and Shin-Osaka.
Digital Suica, PASMO and ICOCA cards are available on Apple devices with NFC functionality. This means you can travel and pay throughout the country using only your iPhone or Watch. The cards are available via theApple Walletapp, no deposit required. Tap your device at the train station ticket gate or store payment machine for validation. The cards are not available on Android devices sold outside Japan. Digital IC cardscannotbe refunded to a non-Japanese bank account.
Should you still haveleftover balanceon your card by the time you are leaving Japan or the card is about to expire, you can spend the money at restaurants, convenience stores, or at the duty-free shops at the airport.
Many banks no longer handle foreign cash exchange or outsource it to Travelex. Specialized currency exchange shops provide better rates than banks (for example, the Access Ticket chain of shops in Tokyo, Nagoya, Kyoto, and Osaka often has rates within 1% of mid-market for US dollars, euros, and British pounds) and generally work more quickly. They also often sell discounted train and bus tickets and restaurant vouchers. These shops can usually be recognized by displays of foreign banknotes at their windows or with the words "money exchange" or similar. US dollars, euros, Swiss francs, British pounds, and Canadian, Australian, and New Zealand dollars can be easily exchanged at these shops. Singapore dollars are the most widely accepted Asian currency, followed by the South Korean won, Chinese yuan, Hong Kong dollars, and New Taiwan dollars. Less-used Asian currencies like Philippine pesos, Vietnamese dong, Malaysian ringgit, and Thai baht are now accepted at currency exchanges in Tokyo, Nagoya, Osaka, and Fukuoka. There are also foreign currency exchange machines in many shopping centers in large and medium-sized cities; they offer a rate 5-10% below the mid-market rate even for US dollars so avoid them if you can, but outside the largest cities, they may be the only option.
If you are exchanging amounts over ¥200,000 (whether cash or traveller's checks), you will be required to provide identification that includes your name, address, and date of birth. Since passports usually do not show your address, bring along another form of ID such as a driver's license that shows your address.
Retail hours are surprisingly limited, typically 10:00-20:00, though most shops are open on weekends and public holidays except New Year, and close on one day a week. However, you will always find something you could need to buy at any time of day.Convenience storeslike 7-Eleven, Family Mart and Lawson are ubiquitous and often operate 24/7.
Thanks to a tradition ofomiyage(souvenirs given to friends, family, and colleagues), a history of regions specializing in particular crafts, as well as development programs like One Village One Product, Japan has nearly perfected the art oflocal products(名物meibutsu). Pretty much every dot on the map, no matter how small the town, has some product it's known for. The most common ones are food; some are fresh foods such as fish or cooked dishes you would have to eat while there, but many others are packaged foods, beverages, or ingredients that can be brought home. Local products also include arts and crafts; while some are mere trinkets, others would serve well as decorative keepsakes or practical items to use at home. Local products are a large part of Japan's domestic tourism market, so they're generally easy to find; you can almost always find shops near major train stations and roadside stations selling them, although prices may be slightly better if you shop around town.
Japan is known for its upscaledepartment stores(デパートdepāto), the nicest of which feature beautiful interior architectural ornamentation and still employ uniformed women to operate the elevators while informing customers where to find items.Depātotypically have a food court and groceries in the basement, while the roof often has a garden (which doubles as a beer garden during the summer) and some affordable eateries.
¥100 shops(百円ショップhyaku-en shoppu), similar toGermany'sEin-Euro-Shop, are a Japanese institution: they sell household goods, packaged food, gag gifts and much more, and everything costs ¥108 (food and soft drinks) or ¥110 (all others) after tax.  These are a good option for finding cheap gifts or even travel adapters. Major chains includeDaiso, Can Do (キャンドゥ), Seria (セリア), and Silk (シルク). There are also convenience-store-like ¥100 shops such as Lawson Store 100 which carry a limited range of fresh food like sandwiches, drinks and vegetables. There is also a popular discount store chain called Don Quijote (ドン・キホーテ), often abbreviated to Donki (ドンキ), though items there are not restricted to ¥100 and cover a wider range of price points.
Second handis very popular in Japan, and the quality of 2nd-hand products in Japan is really worth considering this an option, e.g. for electronics, music equipment, clothes, or outdoor and camping equipment. SeeShopping in Japan#Second hand shopsfor famous shops.
Many Westerners come to Japan in search ofanime(animation),manga(comics),hentai(erotic manga), andvideo games. One of the best places to shop isAkihabarain Tokyo.
Battery-poweredsmall electronics and still camerasmade for sale in Japan will work anywhere in the world. There are no great bargains to be found, but the selection is unparalleled. However, if you are buying other electronics to take home, it's best to shop at stores that specialize in "overseas" configurations, many of which can be found in Tokyo'sAkihabara. Japanese AC runs at 100 volts, so check devices' ratings; if it's not rated for 100–120V, using it without a step-down transformer can be dangerous.
When it comes to casualfashion, Japan is hard to beat.TokyoandOsakain particular are home to many shopping districts, and there is an abundance of stores selling the latest fashion, particularly those catering to youths.
Japan's main contribution to jewelry is thecultured pearl, developed by Mikimoto Kōkichi. Thepearlsare widely available, although there is little if any price difference to buying them outside Japan. For those who insist on getting their hands on the "authentic" stuff, Mikimoto's flagship store is in theGinzadistrict of Tokyo, while the small town ofTobastill hosts Mikimoto's Pearl Island.
Then of course there iskimono, the classic Japanese garment. While very expensive new, second-hand kimono can be had at a fraction of the price, or you can opt for a much cheaper and easier to wear casualyukatarobe. Seepurchasing a kimonofor buying your own. When wearing a kimono, it should always be wrapped left over right; doing the reverse is a major faux pas as that is only done when dressing the dead.
There is a10% consumption taxon most sales in Japan. The only exceptions are take-away food and non-alcoholic beverages, which are subject to a lower 8% tax. Foreign visitors can claim a refund on the consumption tax if they spend at least ¥5,000 (before tax) per day per participating shop, and they bring the items out of Japan with them.
There is no clear rule if tax is included or not in a displayed price. Supermarkets will mostly always show both prices. Budget restaurants will most likely display tax-included prices. Fancy eateries on the other hand may often leave the tax out of their quoted prices, so not to appear too expensive.
The wordzeinuki(税抜) means tax-excluded,zeikomi(税込) means tax-included. If you cannot find out any words in the price card, most of them are tax-included.
Tipping is not a part of Japanese culture. Japanese people are uncomfortable with being tipped and are likely to be confused, amused or possibly even offended if tipped. The Japanese pride themselves on the service given to customers, and a further financial incentive is unnecessary. If you leave a tip in a restaurant, the staff will probably come running after you to return the money you 'forgot'. Many Westernised hotels and restaurants may add a 10% service charge, and family restaurants may add a 10% late-night charge after midnight.
Occasionally the hotel or inn will leave a small gratuity envelope for you to tip the maids, though it is completely optional.Neverleave a cash tip on a table or hotel bed, because the Japanese consider it impolite if it is not concealed in an envelope. Exceptions to the no-tipping culture are high-end ryokan (see§Sleep) and interpreters or tour guides.
Known for their pervasiveness and the (notorious) variety of products they sell. Most will take ¥1,000 bills, and some types such as train ticket machines will take up to ¥10,000; none accept ¥1 or ¥5 coins, and only some accept ¥2,000 notes. Many vending machines still refuse the "new" (2021) ¥500 coin, and the introduction of the new series of all notes in July 2024 means you will need to double-check that the machine you are using accepts the new notes.
With exceptions like some train ticket vending machines and some drink machines from major companies, credit cards arenotaccepted. However, IC cards like Suica and PASMO are often accepted for payment, particularly in train stations. Cigarette vending machines require a Taspo card (age verification), which are not available to non-residents, but local smokers are usually happy to lend you theirs.
Vending machine drinks are a fun only-in-Japan indulgence, but at ¥120-190 per drink they can add up, and will generally cost less at a supermarket or drugstore (but not from a convenience store). Machines that stock drinks from smaller companies like Cheerio or Two-Down charge less, starting at ¥100.
Japanese cuisine, renowned for its emphasis on fresh, seasonal ingredients, has taken the world by storm. The key ingredient of most meals iswhite rice, usually served steamed.Soybeansare a key source of protein and take many forms, notably themisosoup (味噌汁miso shiru) served with many meals, but also tofu (豆腐tōfu) bean curd and the ubiquitoussoy sauce(醤油shōyu).Seafoodfeatures heavily in Japanese cuisine, including creatures of the sea and many varieties ofseaweed. A complete meal is always rounded out by somepickles(漬物tsukemono).
One of the joys of getting out of Tokyo and travelling within Japan is to discover the local specialties. Every region within the country has a number of delightful dishes, based on locally available crops and fish. InHokkaidotry the fresh sashimi and crab. InOsakadon't miss theokonomiyaki(お好み焼き) stuffed with green onions and the octopus balls (たこ焼きtakoyaki).
Most Japanese food is eaten withchopsticks(箸hashi). Eating with chopsticks is a surprisingly easy skill to pick up, although mastering them takes a while.
You shouldn't "whittle" your disposable chopsticks after breaking them apart (which would imply you think they're cheap), but for cleanliness itisgood manners to put them back in their paper wrapper when you're finished eating.
Most soups and broths, especiallymiso, are drunk directly out of the bowl after you've chopsticked out the larger bits, and it's also normal to pick up a bowl of rice for easier eating. For main-dish soups likerāmenyou will be given a spoon. Curry rice and fried rice are also eaten with spoons.
Many restaurants give you a hot towel (o-shibori) to wipe your hands with (not your face) as soon as you sit down.
Japanese never putsoy sauceon a bowl of rice. Japanese don't like to waste food (including soy sauce, so don't pour more than you need), but it's fine in most restaurants if you leave some food on your plates.
In all types of Japanese restaurants, staff generally ignore you until you ask for something. Say "sumimasen" ("excuse me") and maybe raise your hand at a large restaurant. Restaurants will present you with the bill after the meal. Pay at the counter when leaving—do not leave payment on the table and walk out.Tippingis not customary in Japan, although many sit-down restaurants apply 10% service charges and 24-hour "family restaurants" usually have a 10% late-night surcharge.
The number of restaurants (レストランresutoran) in Japan is stupendous, and you will never run out of places to go. Japanese almost never invite guests to their homes, so socializing nearly always involves eating out. Eating out is generally cheaper than in Western countries, though still expensive by Asian standards, if you stick to a basic rice or noodles meal at a local joint. At the other end of the spectrum, fine dining can be very expensive indeed.
Menus will, for most establishments, be in Japanese only; however, many restaurants have models (many in exquisite detail) of their meals in their front window, and if you can't read the menu it may be better to take the waiter or waitress outside and point at what you would like. There may be photographs of the food labeled with names and prices.
Many cheap chain eateries havevending machineswhere you buy a ticket and give it to the server. At many of these restaurants, you'll have to be able to read Japanese or match the price from models or picture menus, along with some of the kana (characters) to the choices at the machine. Some other places have all-you-can-eat meals calledtabehōdai(食べ放題),byuffe(ビュッフェ, "buffet"), orbaikingu(バイキング "Viking", because "smorgasbord" would be too hard to pronounce in Japanese).
TheMichelin Guideis considered by many Western visitors to be the benchmark of good restaurants in Japan, but there are plenty of equally good eats to be had without the Michelin price tag, and many top restaurants are left out by choice.Tabelog(食べログ) is the go-to directory for Japanese people looking at restaurant reviews, with famously tough ratings: a 3.5 out of 5 is considered extraordinarily high. While the interface is available in English, most reviews are only in Japanese.
Japan is considered by many to be one of the world's centers of fine dining. Japan is tied with France for first place as the country with the most Michelin-star restaurants. Unfortunately, Japanese fine dining can be somewhat inaccessible to foreign visitors; online bookings are typically not an option, staff typically speak little to no English, and some fine dining establishments do not accept reservations from new customers without an introduction from one of their regular diners (although Michelin-listed places will).  If you are staying in a top-end luxury hotel, the concierge may be able to score you a reservation at one of these places provided you make the request well in advance, and there is also a cottage industry of online reservation brokers that can arranges tables—for a fee, of course. Unlike in other countries, most Japanese fine dining restaurants do not accept credit cards, and you will be expected to pay for your mealin cash.
Traditional Japanese inns(see§Ryokan)are a common way for travellers to enjoy a finekaisekimeal. The elaborate meals featuring local seasonal ingredients are considered an essential part of a visit to a ryokan, and factor heavily into many people's choice of inn.
Practically every town and hamlet in Japan boasts its own "famous" noodle (麺men) dish.
There are two major noodle types native to Japan: thin buckwheatsoba(そば) and thick wheatudon(うどん). Chinese egg noodles orrāmen(ラーメン) are also very popular but more expensive (¥500 and up) and typically include a slice of grilled pork and a variety of vegetables. Slurping your noodles is acceptable and even expected. According to the Japanese, it cools them down and makes them taste better. Any remaining broth can be drunk directly from the bowl.
Perhaps Japan's most famous culinary exports aresushi(寿司 or 鮨), usually raw fish over vinegared rice, andsashimi(刺身), plain raw fish. Most sushi restaurants keep a handy multilingual decoding key on hand or on the wall. However, sushi in Japan often bears little similarity to what Western visitors may be used to back home; do not expect to find California rolls or volcano rolls in Japan. Sushi in Japan tends to be simple, just fish and rice, with an emphasis on freshness.
At the finest sushi restaurants, the chef puts a dab of fierywasabiradish into the sushi, and glazes the fish with soy sauce for you. Thus, such sushi restaurants don't have individual bowls of soy sauce or wasabi. Most restaurants, though, provide them at the table. (Turn nigiri sushi upside down before dipping, as the soy sauce is to flavor the fish, not to drown the rice.) Slices of pickled ginger (gari) refresh the palate.
When eating sushi, it's perfectly acceptable to use your fingers. Good sushi is always made such that you can put the entire piece into your mouth at once.
Theteppanyaki(鉄板焼き, confusingly known in the U.S. as "hibachi") and self-grillyakiniku(焼肉, Japanese-style "Korean barbecue") cooking methods, as well as the deep friedtempura(天ぷら) battered shrimp and vegetables originate here. Meat (especially beef) can be fiercely expensive, like the famous marbledKobe beef, which can cost thousands per serving. Tempura has entered the Japanese fine dining repertoire, and there are numerous fine tempura omakase restaurants in which the chef deep-fries the dish in front of you and puts it directly on your plate to be eaten immediately.
Other uniquely Japanese foods includeokonomiyaki(お好み焼き, "cook it how you like it", a batter with cabbage, meat, seafood, and vegetable fillings of your choice, often self-cooked at your table) andyakitori(焼き鳥, grilled skewers of every chicken part imaginable).
Japanese curry (カレーkarē) is very distinct fromIndiancurry. Curry powder was introduced to Japan in the late 19th century by theBritish. The Indian curry brought by the British was too spicy for Japanese tastes, but they altered the recipe to make it sweeter and thicker. Curry restaurants can be found throughout the country, but there are also localized versions, such asKanazawaCurry,BizenCurry, andKuwanaCurry. Soup curry is a famous dish inHokkaido. Curry udon and other curry combinations are also quite popular.
However, homesick Indians need not fret. Indian curry (インドカレーindo karē), which in Japan is primarily based on North Indian styles, has exploded in popularity in Japan in the 21st century, and in the major cities, there are many restaurants operated by Indian and Nepali immigrants that serve it.
Shokudō(食堂 "cafeteria" or "dining hall") serve up simple, popular dishes andteishokusets at affordable prices (¥500-1,000). When in doubt, go for the daily special orkyō no teishoku(今日の定食), which nearly always consists of a main course, rice, soup and pickles. A staple of theshokudōis thedonburi(丼), meaning a bowl of rice with a topping.
A closely related variant is thebentō-ya(弁当屋), which serves takeout boxes known aso-bentō(お弁当). While travelling on long-distance trains, don't forget to sample the vast array ofekiben(駅弁) or "station bento".
Department store basements are often huge spaces filled with expansive amounts of fresh food from throughout the country and local dishes. You can get bento boxes, take out food on a stick, bowls of soup, and often find samples of treats to try. You can also find restaurants in department stores, often on the top floors.
Various types ofhot pot(鍋nabe), as well as a number of stewed food items known asoden(おでん) are popular in Japan during the winter. You can often findpseudo-Western dishes, which were adapted from European and American cuisines, but often heavily Japanized. See theJapanese cuisineandWestern food in Asiaarticles for more details.
During the summer months when it's not raining, many buildings and hotels have restaurants on their rooftops and serve dishes like fried chicken and french fries, as well as light snacks. The specialty is, of course,draft beer(生ビールnama-biiru). You can order large mugs of beer or pay a fixed price for an all-you-can-drink (飲み放題nomihōdai) course lasting for a set period of time (usually up to 2 hours). Cocktails and other drinks are also often available as part of all-you-can-drink sets.
Japanese fast food restaurants offer decent quality at reasonable prices. Many chains offer interesting seasonal choices that are quite tasty. Fast food chains offer the range from classic Japanese food through to modern American junk food.
There are also a number of Japanesefamily restaurants(ファミレスfamiresuor ファミリーレストランfamirii resutoran), serving a wide variety of dishes, including steak, pasta, Chinese style dishes, sandwiches, and other foods. Though their food is relatively uninteresting, these restaurants usually have illustrated menus, so travellers who cannot read Japanese can use the photos to choose and communicate their orders.
If you're travelling on the cheap, Japan's numerous convenience stores (コンビニkonbini) can be a great place to grab a bite to eat; they are everywhere and almost always open 24/7. Major chains include7-Eleven,Lawson, andFamily Mart. You can find instant noodles, sandwiches, meat buns, and some small prepared meals, which can be heated up in a microwave in the store. An excellent option for food on the go isonigiri(oromusubi), which is a large ball of rice stuffed with (say) fish or pickled plum and wrapped in seaweed, and usually cost ¥100-150 each (as of Mar 2019).
For those really on a budget, most supermarkets (sūpā) have a wide variety of ready-to-eat meals, bentos, sandwiches, snacks and the like, generally cheaper than convenience stores. Some supermarkets are open 24 hours a day.  Supermarkets and greengrocers (八百屋yaoya) are also the best place to buy fruit, which tends to be expensive in Japan.
One Japanese institution worth checking out is thedepachika(デパ地下) or department store basement food court, featuring dozens of tiny specialist stalls dishing up local specialties ranging from exquisitely packed tea ceremony candies and $100 melons to fresh sushi and Chinese takeaway. They're often a little upmarket pricewise, but discount heavily towards the end of the day: look for little red half price (半額hangaku) and X% off signs (eg. 2割, readni-wari, means 20% off).
Although the situation is improving in major cities, strict vegetarians (much less vegans) may have serious difficulty finding a meal that does not include animal products, particularly as the near-ubiquitous Japanese soup stockdashiis usually prepared with fish and often pops up in unexpected places likemiso, rice crackers, curry, omelettes (includingtamagosushi), instant noodles and pretty much anywhere salt would be used in Western cuisine.Sobaandudonnoodle soups virtually always use bonito-basedkatsuodashi, and typically the only vegetarian-safe item on the menu in a noodle shop iszarusoba, or plain cold noodles—but even for this the dipping sauce typically containsdashi.
Your best bet for finding vegetarian food is Indian and Italian restaurants, which are quite common even in smaller towns. Other options include temples serving Buddhist cuisine (Mount Koyais particularly famous for this),kaiten(conveyor belt) sushi shops and, in larger towns, dedicated vegetarian or macrobiotic (自然食shizenshoku) restaurants.
Travelling in Japan with food allergies (アレルギーarerugī) isvery difficult. Awareness of severe allergies is low and restaurant staff are rarely aware of trace ingredients in their menu items.
A serioussoy(大豆daizu) allergy is basically incompatible with Japanese food. The bean is used everywhere, including soybean oil for cooking. Keeping astrictgluten-free dietwhile eating out is also close to impossible. Most common brands of soy sauce and mirin contain wheat, while miso is often made with barley or wheat. Commercially prepared sushi vinegar and wasabi may both contain gluten.
On the upside, avoidingdairyproducts is straightforward, as they are uncommon in traditional Japanese cuisine.Peanutsand other tree nuts are basically not used in Japanese cooking, with the exception of a few snacks and desserts. Peanut oil is rarely used.
Due to the very small size of theMuslimandJewishcommunities, finding halal orkosherfood isvery difficultin Japan, and you will need to do some advanced planning before your trip. Muslim visitors can contact theJapan Islamic Trust, while Jewish visitors can contact theJewish Community of Japanfor more information.
The Japanese drink a lot: not only green tea in the office, at meetings and with meals, but also all types of alcoholic beverages in the evening with friends and colleagues. The drinking age is 20. However, ID verification is almost never requested at restaurants, bars, or convenience stores, so long as the purchaser does not appear obviously underage. The main exception is in the large clubs in Shibuya, Tokyo, which during busy times will ID everyone entering the club.
Drinking in public is legalin Japan, as is public intoxication. It's especially common to drink at festivals andhanami. It's also not unusual to have a small drinking party on the bullet trains.
If you're looking for an evening of food and drink in a relaxed traditional atmosphere, go to anizakaya(居酒屋, Japanese-style pub), easily identified by red lanterns with the character 酒 ("alcohol") hanging out front. Many of them have an all-you-can-drink (飲み放題nomihōdai) deals at about ¥1,000 for 90 minutes (on average), although you will be limited to certain types of drinks. Food is invariably good and reasonably priced. Most izakaya have a compulsory cover charge, with a complimentary snack to go with it.
A common Japanese institution is thesnack(スナックsunakku). These small neighborhood bars are usually run by an aging woman addressed asmama-san("Ms. Mom"); besides serving food and a limited selection of drinks (often just beer and whiskey), she's a surrogate mother for patrons to converse with and get advice and even an occasional scolding from. Many are dive bars filled with cigarette-smoking regulars; an occasional visit from foreigners may be welcomed, but if you don't speak some Japanese you're undoubtedly missing some of the appeal. Somewhat related arehostess clubs(キャバクラkyaba-kura, short for "cabaret club"), where attractive female hostesses will provide conversation, pour drinks, entertain, and to some degree flirt with male clients, and charge upwards of ¥3,000/hour for the service, Tourists will probably feel out of place and may even be denied entry altogether. The hostesses are professional flirts, not prostitutes, and most hostess clubs prohibit physical intimacy or sexual conversation topics. There are alsohost clubs(ホストクラブhosuto kurabuor ホスクラhosu kura) where the roles are reversed, and female customers pay for attractive male company instead. In both of these, you will generally be expected to buy drinks for your host/hostess, and not doing so will greatly upset them as these make up a significant part of their income. Agirls bar(ガールズバーgāruzu bāor ガルバgaruba) is similar to a hostess club, except that the attractive women are bartenders and stay behind the bar when chatting with customers. These are typically cheaper than hostess clubs, but just like in hostess clubs, you will be expected to buy drinks for your bartender. Aseku kyaba(セクキャバ) is the erotic version of the hostess club, in which limited physical intimacy is allowed.
Unlike in the Anglosphere, aclub(クラブkurabu) is not a nightclub, but instead is the posh equivalent of the hostess club, with a much more private experience. These are typically patronized by the who's who of Japanese society such as politicians, celebrities, company presidents or elite professional athletes, and the hostesses are expected to be more polished and well-educated in a wide range of "high class" conversational topics like current affairs and business news. These are typically very expensive, and require you to be introduced by one of their regular customers, meaning that you will not be admitted if you just show up at the door.
Dedicatedgay barsare comparatively rare in Japan, but the districts ofShinjuku ni-chomein Tokyo andDoyama-choin Osaka have busy gay scenes. Most gay/lesbian bars serve a small niche (muscular men, etc.) and will not permit those who do not fit the mold, including the opposite sex, to enter. While a few are Japanese only, foreigners are welcome at most bars.
Izakaya, bars and snacks typically have cover charges (カバーチャージkabā chāji), usually around ¥500 but on rare occasions more, so ask if the place looks really swish. In izakayas this often takes the form of being served some little nibble (お通しotōshi) as you sit down, and no, you can't refuse it and not pay. Some bars also charge a cover chargeandan additional fee for any peanuts you're served with your beer.
Karaoke parlors serve drinks and snacks. Orders are placed via a phone on the wall, by pressing a button to summon staff, or in high-tech ones using the karaoke machine's tablet or remote control.
If you're just looking for a jolt of caffeine, go to Starbucks or one of its Japanese competitors such as Doutor or Excelsior. But for a more calm and unique experience, the Japanese coffee shop,kissaten(喫茶店), has a long history. Most are one-of-a-kind affairs and reflect the tastes of their clientele. A peculiar kind of kissaten is thejazz coffee shop; these moody joints for jazz buffs are strictly for quiet listening, andnotfor conversation.
Maid cafés(メイド喫茶meido kissaor メイドカフェmeido kafe) and other cosplay restaurants have employees dressed as French maids pamper their clients while serving them non-alcoholic beverages and food.
Vending machines(自動販売機jidōhanbaiki, orjihankiin slang) are omnipresent in Japan and serve up drinks 24 hours a day at the price of ¥120-150 a can/bottle. In addition to cans of soft drinks, tea and coffee, you can find vending machines that sell beer, sake and hard liquor. In winter, some machines will also dispense hot drinks—look for a red label with the writing あたたかい (atatakai) instead of the usual blue つめたい (tsumetai). Vending machines that sell alcoholic beverages are usually switched off at 23:00.
Sakeis a fermented alcoholic beverage brewed from rice. The Japanese wordsake(酒) can mean any kind of alcoholic drink, and in Japan the wordnihonshu(日本酒) is used to refer to what Westerners call "sake". Sake is around 15% alcohol, and contrary to popular belief, is usually not served hot, but often chilled; defaulting to room temperature is in most cases safe. Bottles and menus often show thenihonshu-do(日本酒度), a "sake level" that measures the sweetness or dryness of the brew, the average today being around +3 (slightly dry). When making a purchase, price is often a fair indicator of quality.
Shōchū(焼酎) is the big brother of sake, a stronger-tasting distilled type of alcohol. Traditionalshōchūare most commonly made of rice, yam, or grain, but can be made of other materials like potatoes, too. Typically around 25% alcohol and often cheap at less than ¥1000 for a big 1L bottle, these can be served straight, on the rocks, or mixed with hot or cold water.Shōchūindustrially made out of sugar is often used and served as a kind of cooler mixed with juice or soda known as achū-hai, short for "shōchūhighball".
Umeshu(梅酒), inaccurately called "plum wine", is prepared by soaking Japaneseumeplums (actually a type of apricot) in white liquor so it absorbs the flavor, and the distinctive, penetrating nose of sour dark plum and sweet brown sugar is a hit with many visitors. Typically about 10-15% alcohol, it can be taken straight, on the rocks (ロックrokku) or mixed with soda (ソダ割りsoda-wari).
Japanesewhisky([ジャパニーズ] ウイスキー[japanīzu] uisukī), popular domestically for over 150 years, has also come to international attention and won numerous awards. It can be had neat/straight (ストレートsutorēto) or on the rocks (オン・ザ・ロックon za rokkuor simply ロックrokku), but it's much more common to dilute it, the same as withshōchū. The most common preparation is a highball (ハイボールhaibōru), 1 part whisky and 2 parts soda water over ice. Another common drink uses cold mineral water (水割りmizu-wari) in the same proportions, or in the winter, hot water (お湯割りo-yu-wari).
There are several large brands of Japanesebeer(ビールbiiru), including Kirin, Asahi, Sapporo, and Suntory. Yebisu is also a popular beer brewed by Sapporo. In Japanese restaurants, beer is typically served in various sizes of bottles (瓶bin), or draft (生namameaning "fresh"). Most Japanese beers are dry pilsners, with strengths averaging 5%, which pair well with Japanese food but are definitely light in flavor. Even the few dark beers like Asahi Super Dry Black are actually darklagers, so despite their color they're still not very full-bodied.Microbreweriesare quickly picking up steam, and theirkurafuto biiru(クラフトビール "craft beer") orji-biiru(地ビール "local beer") bring some welcome diversity to the market. They haven't caught on in most restaurants yet, but they're not too difficult to find; besides brewpubs and good liquor stores like the widespread Yamaya (店舗 or やまや), other good places to look are department store basements and shops near train stations selling local specialties.
Japanesewine(ワインwain) is actually quite nice but costs about twice as much as comparable wine from other countries. Several varieties exist, and imported wine at various prices is available nationwide. Specialized stores and large department stores offer the most extensive offerings. Most wine, red and white, is served chilled and you may find it hard obtaining room-temperature (常温jō-on) wine when dining out.
The most popular beverage by far istea(お茶o-cha), provided free of charge with almost every meal, hot in winter and cold in summer. There is a huge variety of tea in bottles and cans in convenience-store fridges and vending machines. Unless specified, tea is usually Japanese green tea; Western-style black tea is calledkōcha(紅茶), and Chinese oolong tea (ウーロン茶ūron cha) is also popular. Traditional Japanese teas are always drunk neat, without the use of milk or sugar. Japan also has its own adaptation of Western milk tea, often labelled "royal milk tea", which is widely available at most convenience stores, supermarkets, vending machines, cafes and Western restaurants. Compared to traditional English tea, Japanese royal milk tea uses more milk and less water, making giving it a creamier texture.
Coffee(コーヒーkōhī) is quite popular in Japan. It's usually brewed to the same strength as European coffee; weaker, watered down coffee is calledAmerican. Canned coffee (hot and cold) is a bit of a curiosity, and widely available in vending machines for about ¥120 per can. Most canned coffee is sweet, so look for brands with the English word "Black" or the kanji 無糖 ("no sugar") if you want it unsweetened.
There are many uniquely Japanesesoft drinksand trying random drinks from vending machines is one of the little traveller's joys of Japan. Calpis (カルピスKarupisu) is a kind of yogurt-based soft drink that tastes better than it sounds. The famous Pocari Sweat (ポカリスエットPokari Suetto) is a Gatorade-style isotonic drink. A more traditional Japanese soft drink is Ramune (ラムネ), nearly the same as Sprite or 7-Up but noteworthy for its unusual bottle, where one pushes down a marble into an open space below the spout instead of using a bottle opener.
American soft drink brands are widely available. The only choices for diet soda will be Diet Coke, Coke Zero, or Diet Pepsi. In Japan, the term "juice" (ジュースjūsu) is a catch-all term for any kind of soft drink — including even Coca-Cola and the like — so if it's fruit squeezings you want, ask forkajū(果汁). Extremely few are 100% juice.Wateris commonly encountered in the form of plastic bottles of water. The tap water is safe to drink, and you can find filling stations for water bottles throughRefill Japan, or by asking for water at a friendly restaurant.
In addition to the usual youth hostels and business hotels, you can find several kinds of uniquely Japanese accommodation, ranging from rarefiedryokaninns to strictly functionalcapsule hotelsand utterly over-the-toplove hotels.
When reserving any Japanese accommodation, bear in mind that many smaller operations may hesitate to accept foreigners, fearing language difficulties or other cultural misunderstandings. Many Western hotel booking sites also have only a small selection of Japanese hotels available; to explore the full gamut, use local companiesRakuten TravelorJalan, which have good English sites.
Pricing for Japanese inns is oftenper person, not per room. Bizarrely, some Japanese hotel chains also charge per person. Read the fine print, and check what meals are included at inns since this can make a big difference in the price (and the experience).
All accommodations are required by law to make a copy of your passport unless you are a resident of Japan. You can speed up check-in by giving  the clerk aphoto copy of your passport, especially if you are travelling in groups. While larger hotels and major chains are fine with credit cards, many smaller places andryokanremaincash only.
Traditional Japanese houses are designed to be cool in summer, which all too often means that they arefreezing cold insidein winter. Bulk up on clothing and make good use of the bathing facilities to stay warm.Futonbedding is usually quite warm and getting a good night's sleep is rarely a problem.
While accommodation is expensive, you may find that you can comfortably use a lower standard of hotel than you would in other countries. Shared baths will usually be spotless, and theft is very unusual in Japan. Just don't expect to sleep in late:check-out timeis invariably 10:00, and any extensions to this will have to be paid for.
You may have difficulty finding rooms at the busiestholiday times, such as Golden Week at the beginning of May. However, many Japanese hotels and third-party booking sites do not accept online bookings more than3 to 6 months in advance, so if it's more than 3 months before your trip and you're not finding anything available, either contact the hotel directly or try again later.
Sizes of Japanese rooms are often measured injō(畳 or sometimes 帖), the number oftatami(straw floor) mats that would cover the floor, regardless of the room's actual flooring material. Sizes vary by region, with 1jōranging from1.445 to 1.824m2, but a commonly used value is1.652m2(17.8sqft). A typical room in a Japanese apartment is 6jō(about9.3m2; 100sqft), big enough to sleep two people with their luggage spread out.
While Western-branded hotels (ホテルhoteru) can be found in Japan's larger cities, it is Japanese brands that rule the roost. Some of the Japanese hotel chains include:
Full-service five-star hotels can turn pampering into an artform, but tend to be rather bland and generic in appearance, despite steep prices starting from ¥20,000per person(not per room). On the other hand, three- and four-starbusiness hotelsare relatively reasonably priced when compared to prices in major European or North American cities, and even two-star hotels provide impeccable cleanliness and features rarely found in the West in that price range.
However, there are several types of uniquely Japanese and far more affordable hotels:
Capsule hotels (カプセルホテルkapuseru hoteru) are the ultimate in space-efficient sleeping: for a small fee (normally ¥3,000–4,000), the guest rents acapsule, sized about 2 x 1 x 1 m and stacked in two rows inside a hall containing tens if not hundreds of capsules. Capsule hotels are segregated by sex, and only a few cater to women.
On entry to a capsule hotel, take off your shoes, place them in a locker and put on a pair of slippers. You will often have to surrender your locker key at check-in to ensure that you do not slip out without paying! On checking in you will be given a second locker for placing your belongings, as there is no space for them in the capsule and little security as most capsules have simply a curtain, not a door. Beware though if there is a curtain, since probing hands may enter it.
Many capsule hotels are attached to a spa of varying degrees of luxury and/or legitimacy, often so that entry to the spa costs perhaps ¥2,000 but the capsule is only an additional ¥1,000. The cheapest capsule hotels will require feeding in ¥100 coins to use the shower. This being Japan, there are always vending machines on hand to dispense toothpaste, underwear and sundries.
Once you retire into your capsule, you will usually find a simple control panel for operating the lights, the alarm clock and the inevitable built-in TV. If you oversleep, you may be hit with another day's charge.
In Tokyo's Shinjuku and Shibuya districts the capsule hotels run at least ¥3,500, but have excellent free massage chairs, saunas, public baths, disposable razors and shampoo, magazines, and coffee in the morning. Your capsule "door" is just a curtain that keeps light out. You will likely hear a steady stream of drunk and sleepy business men crawling into their capsules above and across from you before falling into a mild snore.
Consider the housing shortage that plagued post-war Japan for years, and the way people still live in extended families. If you are 28 years old and still live at home, do you really want to bring your date back to your folks' house? If you are a married couple in a 40-square-metre (430sqft) apartment with two grade school children, do you really want to get down to it at home? Thus, there is the love hotel. They can be seedy, but mainly they are just practical and fulfil a social need.
Love hotel (ラブホテルrabu hoteru) is a euphemism; a more accurate term would be "sex hotel". They can be found in and near red light districts, but most are not in those areas. Many of them are often clustered around highway interchanges or main train stations. The entrance is usually quite discreet, and the exit is separated from the entrance (to avoid running into someone one might know). You rent a room by the night (listed as "Stay" or 宿泊shukuhakuon the rate card, usually ¥6,000-10,000), a couple of hours ("Rest" or 休憩kyūkei, around ¥3,000), or off hours ("No Time Service"), which are usually weekday afternoons. Service charges, peak hour surcharges, and taxes can push your bill up by 25%. Some will accept single guests, but most will not allow same-sex couples or obviously underaged guests.
They are generally clean, safe, and very private. Some have exotic themes: aquatics, sports, or Hello Kitty. As a traveller, rather than a typical client, you (usually) cannot check in, drop your bags, and go out exploring. Once you leave, that is it, so they are not as convenient as proper hotels. "Stay" rates also tend to start only after 22:00, and overstaying may incur hefty additional "Rest" charges. Many rooms have simple food and drinks in a refrigerator, and often have high prices. Take some food and drinks with you instead. The rooms often feature amenities such as jacuzzis, wild theme decoration, costumes, karaoke machines, vibrating beds, sex toy vending machines, and in some cases, video games. Most often, all toiletries (including condoms) are included. Sometimes the rooms have a book that acts as a log, where people record their tales and adventures for posterity. Popular love hotels may be entirely booked up in the cities on weekends.
Hidden cameras have been found in love hotels, planted by other guests or even occasionally the hotel management. Videos of these supposedtousatsu(hidden camera) are popular in adult video stores, although many such videos are staged.
Business hotels (ビジネスホテルbijinesu hoteru) are usually around ¥10,000 per night and have a convenient location (often near major train stations) as their major selling point, but rooms are usually unbelievably cramped. On the upside, you will get a (tiny) en suite bathroom and, quite often, free Internet. Some major chains of cheaper business hotels includeTokyu REI Hotels, known for its generously sized rooms,Sunroute HotelsandToyoko Inn. The latter have a club card, which at ¥1,500, which gives 5% discount always and one free stay per 10 paid stays.
Local business hotels, farther from major stations, can be significantly cheaper (double room from ¥5,000/night). English is rarely spoken, so pre-book online. For two or more, the price can often compete with youth hostels if you share a twin or double room. Full payment is often expected on check-in, and check-out times are early (usually 10:00) and non-negotiable unless you are willing to pay extra. At the very bottom end are dirt-cheap hotels in the labourers' districts of the major cities, such as Kamagasaki in Osaka, or San'ya in Tokyo, where prices start from as little as ¥1,500 for a tiny three-mat room that literally has only enough room to sleep. Designed for homeless day laborers who earn just barely enough to pay the accommodation fee, walls and futons can be thin, and their hygiene standards are often not up to scratch.
Ryokan(旅館) aretraditional Japanese inns, and a visit to one is the highlight of a trip to Japan for many. A night at a ryokanfor onewith two meals starts at about ¥8,000 and goes up into the stratosphere. ¥50,000 a nightper personis not uncommon for some of the posher ones.
Ryokan usually operate on afairly strict scheduleand you will be expected to arrive by 17:00. Before dinner you will be encouraged to take abath—seePublic baths in Japanfor the full scoop. But first, you should change into youryukatarobe, which you wear during your whole stay. Fordinner, ryokan typically servekaisekicuisine, traditional meals that consist of a dozen or more small dishes, elaborately prepared and presented from carefully chosen seasonal ingredients. The food in a good ryokan is a substantial part of the experience (and the bill), and is an excellent way to try some high-class Japanese cuisine. While some ryokan have a few rooms with Western beds, usually you sleep onfutonbedding, which is not a convertible couch but a comfortable mattress rolled out for you on the tatami.Breakfastin the morning is more likely to be served communally in a dining hall at a fixed time. A Japanese breakfast is the norm, meaning rice, miso soup and cold fish.
A last word of warning: some establishments with the word "ryokan" in their name are not the luxurious variety at all but guesthouse-like inns (some minshuku are included).  The price will tell you the type of lodging it is.
Minshuku(民宿) are thebudget version of ryokan, and similar in concept to aB&B. At these family-run houses, the overall experience is similar to ryokan but the food is simpler, dining is communal, bathrooms are shared, and guests are expected to lay out their own futon (although an exception is often made for foreigners). Consequently minshuku rates are lower, hovering around ¥5,000 to ¥10,000 with two meals (一泊二食ippaku-nishoku). Cheaper yet is a stay with no meals (素泊まりsudomari), which can go as low as ¥3,000.
Minshuku are more often found in the countryside, where virtually every hamlet or island, no matter how small or obscure, will have one. The hardest part is often finding them, as they rarely advertise or show up in online booking engines, so asking the local tourist office is often the best way.
Pensions(ペンションpenshon) are similar to minshuku but have Western-style rooms, just like their European namesake.
Kokuminshukusha(国民宿舎), a mouthful that translates quite literally into "people's lodges", aregovernment-run guest houses. They primarily provide subsidized holidays for government employees in remote scenic spots, but they are usually happy to accept paying guests. Both facilities and prices are usually more comparable to ryokan than minshuku standards; however, they are almost invariably large in size and can be rather impersonal. Popular ones need to be booked well in advance for peak seasons: sometimes almost a year in advance for New Year's and the like.
Youth hostels(ユースホステルyūsu hosuteru, often just calledyūsuor abbreviated "YH") are another cheap option in Japan. Hostels can be found throughout the country, so they are popular among budget travellers, especially students. Regular hostels (independent if HI or not) are typically ¥2,000–4,000. It can become more expensive with the official HI youth hostels if you opt for dinner and breakfast and are not a Hostelling International (HI) member, in which case the price for a single night may be over ¥5,000. For HI members, a simple stay can cost as little as ¥1,500 depending on location and season. As elsewhere, some are concrete cell blocks run like reform schools, while others are wonderful cottages in scenic spots. There are even a number of temples that run hostels as a sideline.
Do some groundwork before choosing where to go, theJapan Youth Hostel[dead link]page is a good place to start. Many have curfews (and sometimes a lock-out period during the day when all guests must leave), and dorm rooms are often gender segregated.
Regular hostels can easily be found on the common hotel reservation websites.
Riders' houses(ライダーハウスraidā hausu) are super-budget dorms intended primarily for bikers, both motorized and pedal-powered. While anybody is generally welcome, these are generally located deep in the countryside and access by public transport is impractical or impossible. Generally run as a hobby, riders' houses are very cheap (¥300/night is typical, free is not unheard of), but facilities are minimal; you're expected to bring your own sleeping bag and there may not even be a kitchen or a bath. Long stays are also discouraged and some ban stays of more than one night. These are particularly common in Hokkaido, but can be found here and there around the country. The definitive directory isHatinosu(Japanese only).
Camping is (afternojuku, see below)thecheapest way to get a night's sleep in Japan. There is an extensive network of camping grounds throughout the country; naturally, most are away from the big cities. Transportation to them can also be problematic, as few buses may go there. Prices may vary from nominal fees (¥500) to large bungalows that cost more than many hotel rooms (¥13,000 or more).
Camping wild is illegal in most of Japan, although you can always try asking for permission, or simply pitch your tent late and leave early. Many larger city parks may in fact have large numbers of blue, plastic tarpaulin "tents" with homeless in them.
Campsites in Japan are known askyanpu-jo(キャンプ場), while sites designed for cars are known asōto-kyanpu-jo. The latter tend to be far more expensive than the former (¥5,000 or so) and should be avoided by those setting out on foot unless they also have lower-key accommodation available. Campsites are often located nearonsen, which can be quite convenient.
TheNational Camping Association of Japanhelps maintainCampjo, a Japanese-only database of nearly all campsites in Japan. TheJNTOwebsite has a fairly extensive list (in PDF format) of camp grounds in English, and local tourist offices are often well informed.
For the real budget traveller wanting to get by on the cheap in Japan is the option ofnojuku(野宿). This is Japanese for "sleeping outside". Some young Japanese do this when they travel. Thanks to a low crime rate and relatively stable climate,nojukuis a genuinely viable option if you're travelling in a group or feel confident doing it on your own. Commonnojukuplaces are basically anywhere that has some kind of shelter and public toilets nearby.
Japan is blessed with cheap public bathing facilities pretty much everywhere: notablyonsenor hot springs. Even if you cannot find an onsen,sentō(public bath), or sauna is also an option. SeePublic baths in Japan.
Nojuku is really viable only in the summer months, although in the northern island of Hokkaido, even in summer the temperature may dip during the night. On the other hand, there's much more scope for nojuku onOkinawa(although public facilities on the smaller islands are lacking).
Nojuku is not really recommended for first-time travellers to Japan, but for those with some experience, it can be a great way to get into theonsenculture, meet other fellownojukutravellers, and most of all travel very cheaply when coupled withhitchhiking.
Shukubō(宿坊) arelodgings for pilgrims, usually located within a Buddhist temple or Shinto shrine. The experience is broadly similar to a ryokan, but the food will be vegetarian, toilets and showers will usually be shared, and you may be required to participate in the temple's activities, which includes waking upreallyearly to join the monks for morning prayers (which can begin as early as 05:00). Some Zen temples offermeditationlessons and courses. Shukubo can be reluctant to accept foreign guests, but one place where that will not be a problem is the major Buddhist center ofMt. KoyanearOsaka. Check the web-site of theKoyasan Shukubo Associationfor more details. Prices generally range from ¥9,000 to ¥15,000 per night.
There are a number ofguest houses(ゲストハウス) in Japan. Sometimes this is just a synonym for "hostel", but other guest houses are run from someone's private home. Whereas a minshuku is a destination unto itself, guest houses are simply places to stay, and often have convenient locations in cities or nearby suburbs. They may have shared dormitory-style accommodation, and unlike a minshuku orB&Busually don't offer meals. Most will have a curfew as well. Some cater to foreign visitors, although some Japanese language ability will be helpful for finding, booking, and staying at one.
Particularly in Japan's dense cities,hospitality exchange(民泊minpaku) through sites like AirBnB has become very popular. Such rentals are now regulated, and hosts must register with the government and display a license number on their listing. Hospitality exchange can be a good way to find a great deal on premium lodging and experience what a typical home is like for many Japanese.
Many of the listings will be for "mansions" (マンションmanshon), which in Japanese is a common marketing term that really means "condominium". Mansions are typically in high-rise buildings with many amenities, unlike apartments (アパートapaato) which are usually inexpensive flats.
Minpakuis a great boon for rural areas with few hotels, but in cities the law protects hotels from having too much competition. Hosts operating as aminpakurather than a hotel may only rent up to 180 days per year, and local laws may further restrict when rentals are allowed. (For example, in Shinjuku rentals are only allowed on weekends, in Shibuya only during school holidays, and in Kyoto's residential areas only between January and mid-March.) To get around this, some hosts may attempt tricks like asking you to make a one-night reservation and pay under the table for the additional nights; this is illegal, and would leave you with no recourse if you have problems with your rental.
If you're staying for a longer period, you might be able to drastically reduce your living costs by staying in agaijin house.Weekly mansions(short-term apartments) have become popular for residents (typically businessmen on long-term assignment or young singles) and are accessible even to visitors. Renting an apartment is a ridiculously complex and expensive process. SeeWorking in Japan#Accommodationsfor more information.
Even in Tokyo, the trains completely stop running around 01:00, so if you are out after then and want to avoid paying for a cab or even a capsule hotel, there are a few options for killing the hours until the first morning train. If you need to find one of these options fast, station attendants will typically be able to point you in the right direction. Conveniently, many of these facilities are usually clustered around train stations, and they are used to accepting people who have missed the last train home.
In bigger cities, especially around the major stations you can find Internet or Manga cafés. Membership costs around ¥300 one time. Here you can also watch TV, play video games, read comics and enjoy the free drink bar. Prices vary but usually are around ¥400/hour. They often have a special night rate for the period when no trains are running (from around midnight until 05:00 for ¥1,500). Customers are typically given the choice between a computer-equipped or TV-equipped but separated cubicle, while others offer amenities such as a massage chair, a mat to sleep on or even a shower. Some even have private rooms. The cubicles are open towards the top and light can shine in or you might hear the other guests. Expect to pay around ¥2,500–3,000 for 9 h in a cubicle or private room, in case you are looking for a proper sleep.
It is not an especially comfortable option, but it is perfect for checking the next day's train schedule, downloading pictures from your digital camera, writing home, and resting a bit. Often, you may be surrounded by snoring locals who have missed the last train home.
This is only an emergency option if you cannot find anything else and you are freezing outside. Karaoke bars offer entertainment rooms until 05:00 ("free time") for ¥1,500-2,500. Works only with at least 3 people.
Some onsen or sentos stay open all night, especially the ones inside some hotels. You don't necessarily have to have a room at such a hotel, but may still spend the night in the bath and resting areas. These onsen or sentos are known as "super" sentos, and have a 'relaxing area' with amenities such as tatami mats, TV, vending machines and books. Often, for a reasonable fee (on top of the bathing cost), you will be allowed to crash the night on the tatami or in a room with large reclining chairs.
Prices for such overnight onsen or sentos start are ¥1,000–1,500. However, they sometimes have a cutoff time, after which you have to pay for the "next day", often in the middle of the night when you least will want to have it.
In the warmer months, people sleeping or napping on streetsides outside the bigger train stations is a common sight. Many of them just missed their last trains and prefer spending three or four hours waiting for the first train on the asphalt rather than three or four thousand yen for a short-term stay in a hotel or public bath.
While this is definitely the least comfortable way to sleep through the night, it is especially popular with college students (who have no money), and absolutely tolerated by police and station staff; even drunkards sleeping next to their own puke will not be disturbed in their booze-induced sleep.
Similarly, no need to sweat if you fall asleep on a local train after a long party night. However be careful not to oversleep and go to the end of the line. Sometimes, that station turns out to be two hours away from the city. If you're in one of the cities that they service, asleeper traincould be a decent option. This is obviously a lot less useful if you don't want to stay in a different city, but you could always take a bullet train back in the morning or stay in the city for just 1 day before going back on another sleeper train. This isn't recommended for most travelers, but it can offer tremendous value for people who purchased the Japan Rail Pass.
Education is takenvery seriouslyin Japan, often to the point of obsession, and the country is home to several world-class universities and institutions. As citizens of a country with few natural resources, the Japanese believe that absorbing knowledge is the best way to stay competitive in a dynamic and changing world. This drive for success is exactly why Japan became an economic powerhouse in less than a century.
The Japanese educational system emphasises model citizenship — students are taught how to be responsible and productive members of society. Students in Japanese schools are normally expected to clean up their classrooms after school hours, arrive at their classes on time, and be respectful to their teachers.
Hundreds of thousands of foreigners are studying in Japan, either in language schools (to learn Japanese), in universities, or to study Japanese martial arts, or arts and crafts.
Many exchange programs bring foreigners to Japan, including at the university level. Students from many countries are exempt for obtaining a visa if they are coming to study the Japanese language for up to 90 days, while visas sponsored by educational institutions are required for other students.
People from all over the world live and work in Japan.
To work in Japan, a foreigner who is not already a permanent resident must receive a job offer from a guarantor in Japan, and then apply for a working visa at an immigration office (if already in Japan) or an embassy or consulate (if abroad).
The work culture is extremelyhierarchical and formal, much more so than in Western countries. See theWorking and studying in Japanarticle for details. Workers are also expected to go out with their colleagues for food and drinks multiple times a week, which means only getting home when itsreallylate. Women might also face some additional challenges.
TheWorking Holidayprogram is open to young citizens (between 18 and 30) from Australia, New Zealand, Canada, South Korea, France, Germany, Ireland and the UK. Those eligible may apply for working holiday visas without having a prior job offer.
A popular form of employment among foreigners from English speaking countries isteaching English, especially in after-hours English conversation schools known aseikaiwa(英会話). Pay is fairly good for young adults, but rather poor compared to a qualified educator in most Western countries. An undergraduate degree or ESL accreditation is essential for most desirable positions. North American accents are preferred, and there is unspoken preference for white people.
TheJET Programme(Japan Exchange and Teaching) offers young university graduates a chance to teach in Japan. The program is run by the Japanese government but your employer would typically be a local Board of Education who assigns you to one or more public schools, often deep in the countryside. No Japanese skills or formal teaching qualifications are required and your airfare is provided. Pay is somewhat better than the language schools, as are the working conditions.
Quite a few young women choose to work in thehostessindustry, where they entertain Japanese men over drinks and are paid for their time. While pay can be good, visas for this line of work are difficult if not impossible to obtain and most work illegally. The nature of the work also carries risks, notably groping, harassment or worse.
Japan is a countryobsessed with cleanlinessand health hazards are few and far between. Food hygiene standards are very high and there are no communicable diseases of significance.
Tap wateris safe and of good quality throughout the country. Domestic and foreign brands of bottled water are available for¥100-200 everywhere (at least in tourist destinations). Most restaurants serve filtered tap water for free. Unless specifically labeled "mineral water" (ミネラルウォーターmineraru wōtā), water in Japan has a low mineral concentration in general. Radioactivity levels in the water supply have been closely monitored in some areas since the 2011 earthquake and nuclear disaster, but found negligible as far as water used by civilians is concerned; also see theTokyogovernment'sdaily reports.
If you dobecome illwith a cold or other sickness, purchase a mouth-covering, cloth surgical mask. You will find that people frequently wear these out on trains and on the job. This filters your sneezing and coughing so you do not transmit to others.
Second-hand smokeused to be a massive issue in Japan, but public transport, public buildings and most offices are now smoke-free, with increasing numbers of cities banning smoking entirely outside designated smoking areas. Since 2020, even restaurants in Tokyo only allow smoking in dedicated, separately ventilated smoking sections.
Despite the name,Japanese encephalitishas been virtually eradicated from Japan. The main reservoir of the virus is pigs, so vaccination is unnecessary unless you plan on spending time at rural hog farms.
Medical facilities in Japan are on par with the West, and the better known hospitals are usually equipped with the most cutting edge medical technology. For Japanese citizens and residents, the cost of medical treatment is made affordable by the government's national health insurance system. However, for those not covered by it, the cost of medical treatment is expensive. While foreigners in Japan for an extended period (eg. those on Work or Student visas) are allowed access to the national health insurance system on the same terms as citizens, it is not available to tourists on short visits, so be sure to have your travel insurance in order before your trip. However, if you have not made arrangements prior to arrival for any reason,Sompo Japansells travel insurance for visitors that can be applied for online after arrival.
Most Japanese doctors and nurses are unable to communicate in English. Thewebsite of the US embassymaintains a list of hospitals and clinics which have English-speaking staff available.
Japan is one of the safest countries in the world, with crime rates significantly lower than that of most countries. Policing in Japan is the responsibility of the 47 prefectural governments, but all police officers have nationwide jurisdiction.
Kōban(交番), usually translated aspolice boxes, can be found in nearly every neighborhood, identified by a flashing red light. The police are generally helpful (although they rarely speak English), so ask if you get lost or have any trouble. They usually have a detailed map of the area around showing not only the difficult-to-understand numbering system but also the names of major buildings to help to find your way. You can report accidents and petty crimes at akōban, but for serious crimes or other police services, go to a police station (警察署keisatsusho).
Report any thefts or lost items at thekōban. They have forms in English and Japanese, often referred to as the "Blue Form". For lost items, even cash, filling out this form is not wasted effort, as Japanese people will very often take lost items, even a wallet full of cash, to thekōban. If you happen to find such an item, take it to thekōban. If the item is not claimed within six months, it is yours. If it is claimed, you may be due a reward of 5-15%.
Japan has two emergency numbers. To call thepolicein an emergency, dial110(110番hyakutoban). To call for anambulanceorfire truck, dial119. Some Japanese public phones have a red emergency button on the lower panel; press this and then dial. In Tokyo, operators proficient in English and other languages are available; elsewhere, they should usually be able to reach an English translator who will have a three-way conversation with you and the dispatcher. In Tokyo, you can report non-emergencies and get translation in English, Korean, and Chinese from the General Advisory Center at +81 3 3501-0110; it is available M-F 08:30-17:15 except on holidays. Similar services are available from any prefecture's police headquarters by calling#9110(although in some locations you may need to use a local phone number instead), although fewer foreign languages may be available.
Police in Japan may and do detain people up to 23 days before a prosecutor formally files charges, and you may be subjected to nonstop interrogation during this period. This detention period may be extended for another 23 days each time indefinitely by simply amending the charge. You can hire a lawyer only if somebody outside pays the fees in advance, and your lawyer is not allowed to be present during interrogations. Insist on an interpreter and consular access, anddo not fingerprintanything(Japanese equivalent of signing), especially if you do not fully understand what you sign. A signed confessionwillresult in a guilty verdict at your trial.
By far the most common pattern of how foreign tourists end up staring at the cold, yellow walls of a Japanese detention cell is getting drunk and then involved in a fight. Standard police procedure is to detain everybody first and to sort out things later. If anybody accuses you of anything even on the flimsiest grounds, you may be looking at an unpleasant extension to your vacation. Over 99% of criminal trials in Japan end in a conviction, so if your case goes to trial, your conviction is largely a formality, and the main job of the judge is to decide your sentence. If you are convicted of a crime, you will be looking at a first-hand experience of Japan's notoriously harsh prison system.
Japan is exotic and mysterious; what seems strange and even appealing to you during daytime can get obnoxious and annoying to you at night, especially with some booze running through your veins, so control your temper and alcohol level. Police patrol party areas heavily at night and they will be willing to "rescue" a fellow Japanese from a violent foreigner.
Street crime is extremely rare, even for female travellers roaming the streets alone late at night, but it is still no excuse to ditch your common sense. Women travelling alone should take care as they would in their home countries and never hitchhike alone, though taxis are usually safe.
Pickpocketing does sometimes happen: if you take your usual precautions in crowded places such as trains and at Narita Airport, you should be fine.
Women on crowded rush-hour trains may be targeted by molesters (痴漢chikan). Some trains have female-only carriages during rush hour in an effort to combat sexual harassment and upskirting.
A lot of heavy drinking goes on in the evenings and occasionally drunks may be a nuisance, although alcohol-related violence is extremely rare.
The infamousyakuza(ヤクザ), the Japanese gangsters, do not target people not already involved in organized crime. Don't bother them and they will not bother you.
Red-light districts in large cities can be seedy, but are rarely dangerous for visitors. However, some smaller backstreet bars and shops that tout themselves on the street have been known to lay down exorbitant cover charges or drink prices. In some extreme cases, foreigners have reported being drugged at such establishments and then charged as much as ¥700,000 for drinks that they do not remember ordering (notably in the Roppongi and Kabukichō districts of Tokyo). Never go into a place that is suggested by someone that you just met. This goes especially for the street touts in places like Kabukichō. Touting is illegal in Japan.
Bogus monks often wait outside touristy shrines and temples and approach you to ask for donations or sell you religious trinkets; you shouldnotgive any money to them. Keep in mind that Japanese Buddhism is part of the Mahayana school, meaning that monks and nuns do not go on alms rounds, and instead prepare their own food in the monastery. If you wish to make a donation, you should do it at the offering box or the office in the temple; genuine temples will never use high-pressure tactics to solicit donations. Genuine monks and nuns will also never sell you religious items in the street; if you want to buy some Buddhist trinkets, do so at the temple shop.
Prostitution is illegal in Japan, but creative interpretation of the letter of the law combined with lenient policing means that Japan still has a large and vibrant sex industry, mostly geared towards the domestic market. Foreign customers are by and large not welcome, and even establishments that accept them often tack on a hefty "foreigner tax".
HIV remains a concern, and infection rates for syphilis have been surging in the 2020s, particularly in Tokyo.
In large cities, especially in red-light districts, there are some kiosks labeled "free information kiosks" (無料案内所); these provide information forsex-related businesses. If you need general visitors' information, look for a Tourist Information Center (観光案内所) instead. Also be aware that in Japan, the term "health" is often used as a euphemism for prostitution that stops short of actual coitus, but you can tell what type of service is being offered from the Japanese name; the pseudo-English form ヘルス (herusu) is only used to refer to sexual services, while the Sino-Japanese form 健康 (kenkō) is used for legitimate health establishments.
Contrary to its reputation for very efficient and comprehensive public transport, outside of Tokyo, Japan is a very car-centric culture. Street patterns in much of the country have remained unchanged for centuries, so many roads are small and full of blind corners.
Japanese drivers treat traffic lights differently than other drivers. When the light is green at a pedestrian crossing near an intersection, Japanese drivers will often turn onto you. Usually, they will turn halfway and then stop, allowing you to cross, though it is not unheard of for them to charge forwards at full speed, ignoring people who are crossing. Crossing the street when the light is red is illegal, and this is sometimes enforced.
Japan is considered to be very safe for gay and lesbian travellers, and violence against homosexuals is quite rare. There are no laws against homosexuality in Japan, and major cities such as Tokyo and Osaka have a large gay scene, but same-sex relationships are not recognized by the government, and open displays of your orientation are still likely to draw stares and whispers.
Japan is one of the world's most ethnically homogeneous countries, and many Japanese continue to have insular attitudes towards foreigners. Although Article 14 of the Japanese constitution promotes equality and discourages discrimination, the reality is that there are no specific laws against racial or ethnic discrimination. Immigrants and half-Japanese people are sometimes subjected to abuse and discrimination.
The average tourist isunlikelyto experience racist abuse in any way, shape, or form, and violent attacks against foreigners are virtually unheard of.  A few establishments, particularly in the nightlife/sex industry, will refuse entry to all foreigners.  Many Japanese claim that the prohibitions are due to language barriers or perceived social incompatibility (for example, foreigners may not understand proper etiquette) and not racism, and indeed some (but not all) places that usually refuse service to foreigners may make an exception if you are able to speak Japanese or bring a Japanese friend.
Banks are often reluctant or unwilling to give cash advances to foreigners, stemming mainly from stereotypes of untrustworthiness. If you need to get a cash advance from your bank then Japanese language proficiency, or a Japanese friend to vouch for you, will strongly help your case.
Japanese people in general are quite conscious about their English skills and fear that their English ability might be evaluated by others. For that reason, some may be hesitant to talk to you. Communicating with them in Japanese or complimenting their English might help put them at ease.
Japan isprone to earthquakes(地震,jishin). The entire country is situated on four converging tectonic plates that constantly rub against together. Earthquakes in Japan can be very destructive and violent.
On 11 March 2011, a 9.0 magnitude earthquake struck off the coast ofMiyagi prefecture, triggering a very large tsunami and bringing havoc to the city ofSendaiand the surrounding area. The quake (and its aftershocks) were palpable throughout Japan, with the death toll numbering over 15,000, mostly due to the tsunami. Every few days, somewhere in Japan is rattled by a quake large enough to be felt, but most of them are completely harmless. Japan is well-prepared for such disasters though, and has very strict building codes that require buildings to be engineered to withstand major earthquakes. Japan has an early warning system that detects earthquakes and notifies areas that will be affected, giving from a few seconds up to a minute's notice. Use this invaluable time to cover up before the actual jolt.
If you are by the sea and experience even a moderate quake, look fortsunamiwarnings (also in English) on NHK TV (channel 1) and Radio 2 (693kHz). Most tremors and small quakes will merit only a scrolling announcement in Japanese at the top of the screen. If you are near the sea and experience a major earthquake,evacuate to high ground immediately; do not wait for a warning.
Every neighborhood has an evacuation area, most often the local playground. Many schools are set up as temporary shelters. They will be labeled in English. If you are travelling with others, plan to meet there and be aware that portable telephones will likely not work.
There are lots of resources to learn about and prepare for disasters. It almost goes without saying, but this should be donein advance. Once a disaster strikes, you may have neither the time nor the ability to go online and read a lengthy document.
Drug lawsin Japan are stricter than those in many Western countries, particularly for smuggling, and there is a strong stigma against drug consumption in Japanese society. Lawsdo not distinguish between hard and soft drugs, so possession of even personal-use quantities of cannabis can land you a prison sentence of several years. Drug trafficking is punishable by up tolife imprisonment.
If you haveprescription drugs, check with the Japanese Embassy prior to your departure to find out whether or not your medicine is allowed in Japan. If it is illegal, they should also be able to give you information regarding what medicines you can buy in Japan to use in place of your prescription while you are there.
Volcanoes, storms andtyphoonsare primarily a potential issue if you are mountain-climbing or sailing, so check the latest information before heading out. Stick to designated footpaths in volcanic areas as volcanic gas may be an issue. Typhoons are rarely physically dangerous, but they still wreak havoc with the schedules of planes, ferries and, if there are landslides, trains and buses.
There are venomous snakes calledhabu(ハブ) inOkinawaalthough not in unusual numbers. You are unlikely to be bitten by one, but if you are, seek medical help immediately as anti-venoms are available. If you are hiking in Hokkaido and Honshu, be aware of possible bear activity, especially in autumn. Attacks are rare, but in areas such as theShiretoko Peninsula, attach bells to your backpack to scare them away.
Especially in the countryside, be aware of theJapanese giant hornet(大雀蜂 or 大スズメバチōsuzumebachi), a sub-species of the Asian giant hornet; it is about4 centimetres (1.6 inches)long and can sting repeatedly and painfully. Every year, 20–40 people die in Japan after being stung by giant hornets. A hornet defending its nest or feeding spot will make a clicking sound to warn away intruders; if you encounter one, retreat. If you are stung, receive prompt medical attention, as prolonged exposure to the venom could cause permanent injury or even death.
Japan uses the same Type A two-pin and Type B three-pin electrical sockets as North America. The two-pin socket is much more common even in new construction, and older ones are unpolarized meaning they won't accept plugs where one blade is wider than the other. To deal with these, if you don't already own travel adapters, you can instead get a "grounding adapter" at your local hardware store. Electricity is delivered at 100V (somewhat lower than the 120V used in North America), and at 50 Hz (eastern half of Japan) or 60 Hz (western half).  These only make a difference for large items like household appliances; the vast majority of overseas electronic devices like phone chargers and laptops will work fine in Japan.
The Japanese-language national newspapersYomiuri Shimbun(読売新聞) andAsahi Shimbun(朝日新聞) are the two most widely circulated newspapers in the world. Other major national newspapers include theMainichi Shimbun(毎日新聞) andSankei Shimbun(産経新聞).The Nikkei(日本経済新聞) is Japan's main financial newspaper, and the most widely-circulated financial newspaper in the world.
The Japan Times(¥200 daily, ¥250 Sunday) from Tokyo is Japan's largest and oldest English-language daily newspaper, and is sold bundled withThe New York Times International Weekly.Yomirui Shimbunalso prints English-languageThe Japan Newsdaily, andThe Nikkei Weekly(日経ウィークリー) covers business news from Japan every Monday. Many other English publications have gone online-only.
Urban areas in Japan can be incredibly noisy, with a cacophony of clattering pachinko parlors, jingles playing on repeat at discount stores, and machines looping recorded messages warning you that the traffic light is green or the truck is reversing.  If you're sensitive to noise, bring headphones to block out some of the noise.
In women's public toilets, there's often a box that makes an electronic flushing sound when you press the button. What's it for?
Well, many Japanese women don't like the idea of being overheard while in the bathroom. To cover their own noises, women used to flush the toilet repeatedly, wasting a lot of water. To prevent that, the electronic noise maker was created.
The most common brand is calledOtohime. Otohime is a goddess from Japanese mythology, but here the name is a pun, written with kanji to mean "Sound Princess".
Public toilets can be found in railway and metro stations, larger supermarkets, shopping complexes, department stores, and parks. Public toilets in Japan are free. Convenience stores and fast food outlets may not welcome use of their toilets by non-customers. Public toilets in Japan are generally quite clean and often include disinfectant for cleaning the seat. A lack of toilet paper seems to be a problem of the past.
You will find both Western-style porcelain thrones for sitting and floor-level units for squatting. (If you're unfamiliar with these, it's simple: pull your pants down to your knees, and squat facing the curved hood of the toilet. Get closer to the hood than it looks like you need to, or else you might miss.)
In private homes and home-style accommodations, you will often findtoilet slippers, which are to be worn inside the toilet andonlyinside the toilet.
Most visitors come away impressed by the undeniable fact that Japan is the world's leader intoilet technology. Over half of Japan's homes are equipped with high-tech devices known aswashlets(ウォシュレット), which incorporate all sorts of handy features like seat warmers, hot air dryers andtiny robotic arms that squirt water. The device is operated via a control panel and may incorporate over 30 buttons (all labeled in Japanese) at first glance bearing more resemblance to a Space Shuttle navigation panel than your average WC.
Don't panic—help is at hand. The first key to solving the puzzle is that the actual flush mechanism is usuallynotoperated by the control panel: instead, there is a standard, familiar, Western-style lever, switch, button, or knob somewhere and it is thus entirely possible to take care of your business without ever using the washlet features. (In rare cases, mostly with very high-end gear, flushing is integrated; if lifting your bottom off the seat doesn't do the trick, look for buttons labeled 大 or 小, meaning a big or small flush respectively, on a wireless control panel on the wall.) Otherwise, the button for flushing will always be at the far end of the panel and have a large "whirlpool" picture on it. If you're unlucky enough to be dropping the kids off at the pool when the power goes out, have no fear! Even the most ultra-modern toilets will have a physical lever/button/knob that allows for the most basic toilet functions to work.
The second key to exploration is that there is always a big red button labeled 止 with the standard "stop button" symbol ⏹ on the panel—pressing this will instantlystop everything. Older models simply have a lever nearby that controls the flow of a sprayer.
Armed with this knowledge you can now begin to dig deeper. Typical controls include the following:
Other, smaller buttons can be used to adjust the exact pressure, angle, location and pulsation of the jet of water. Sometimes the seat of the toilet is heated, and this can also be regulated. One explanation is that since houses are not usually centrally heated, the toilet business can be made a little more convenient by heating the seat. To be polite and save energy, you should leave the cover down on heated toilet seats.
Some washlets have built-inscent removers/cover-uppers, which may or may not have a button that allows for manual control. If there is no button that allows you to control it, it will (hopefully) turn off when the toilet senses there's no "customer" (i.e. the lid is down).
No, it isn't just your imagination! There are almost no rubbish bins in Japan, anywhere. You are supposed to take your trash home with you.
About 30% of the vending machines have bins for the bottles they sell. You are supposed to take off the lid and throw it in a separate place. Also supermarkets mostly have recycle bins for bottles, milk cartons, food packaging, but not for general waste.
Though, some 7-Elevens have a bin for general waste and in public toilets you might be lucky and find a general waste bin.
Coin laundries are common in Japan.
Names are a complicated matter in Japan. Most Japanese follow the Western naming order when writing or saying their names in English. However, when names are written or spoken in Japanese, they always follow the East Asian naming order offamily name followed by given name. Therefore someone called TaroYamadain English would be calledYamadaTarōin Japanese. The names of historical figures from before the Meiji restoration follow East Asian naming conventions even when written in English.
Using someone's given name when speaking to or about them is considered very personal, and is only done when addressing children of elementary school age or younger, and very close friends. At all other times, the default is touse family names plus-san(さん), a suffix approximately like "Mr." or "Ms." Most Japanese know that Westerners usually go by their given names, so they may call you "John" or "Mary" with no suffix, but unless they tell you otherwise, you should still call them "Family name-san" to be polite. (However, don't introduceyourselfas "John-san". The point is to honor others, not yourself.)
Sanis the default suffix, but you may encounter a few others:
To avoid being overly familiar or formal, stick with "Family name-san" until someone asks you to call them differently.
In business settings, the title is often used in place of the family name when addressing a person; for instance, an employee may address his company's president asshachō-sama(社長様, "Honored Mr./Ms. President"), while a customer may address a shop owner (but not the other employees) astenchō-san("Mr./Ms. Storekeeper").
Lastly, the reigningEmperoris always calledTennō Heika("His (Imperial) Majesty the Emperor"),Kinjō Heika("His Current Majesty") or simplyTennō("the Emperor") orHeika("His Majesty") in Japanese. Calling him "Emperor Reiwa", even in English, is a faux pas since this is strictly his future posthumous name. Calling him by his given name, Naruhito, is considered vulgar.
Most Japanese are very understanding of a foreigner not conforming instantly to their culture; indeed, many believe that their language and culture are among the most difficult to understand in the world, so they are generally quite happy to assist you if you appear to be struggling. However, Japanese will appreciate it if you follow at least the rules below, many of which boil down to social norms of strict cleanliness and avoiding intruding on others (meiwaku).
The post-COVID tourism boom has led to a spike in anti-foreigner sentiment in heavily-touristed areas like Tokyo, Osaka and Kyoto, due to the misbehavior of many foreign tourists. Follow the law, be polite, be considerate and try your best to adhere to Japanese cultural norms.
Japanese people tend to be tolerant of blunders in this regard by foreigners. There are a few serious etiquette breaches that will meet with universal disapproval (even when demonstrated by foreigners) and should be avoided if at all possible:
For most tourists, dressing for daily sightseeing in Japan puts you at a disadvantage: you will most likely stand out, no matter how you dress, next to the throngs ofsalarymen(male office workers) in suits and children in school uniforms. Japan is known for being very fashionable, whether dressing in kimono, tailored suits, or the latest trends from Harajuku.
First and foremost:wear shoes that can easily slip off and on, and keep a pair of socks handy as needed. Athletic shoes are acceptable, but keep them tied loosely so you can slip them off and on. Dress shoes are acceptable as well, as are quality walking sandals (not flip-flops), although sandals are not common outdoor wear for locals. Japanese culture sees shoes as being dirty, and before entering someone's house, certain restaurants, dressing rooms, and temples (to name a few), youmustremove your shoes. The older generation of Japanese tend to group steps into two types: wooden ("clean") and concrete or stone ("dirty"). If you are going to be stepping on to wood, take your shoes off and place them to the side; there might even be a cubby hole for you to put your shoes in.
Anddon't forget socks,as it's generally more common to wear socks when in temples and houses, if you don't have slippers available. Japanese people are known for their love of socks, and sock stores selling high quality and colorful socks are found in most cities. Many of the socks sold in Japan are made there. So, bring a pair of socks in your bag while you're sightseeing, if you aren't wearing them. Tights are acceptable for women. Footsies and under the ankle socks are handy, especially if you're going for the "no socks" look.
Shorts are uncommon, and generally only worn by children and teens. Though a common item in tourist summer apparel, instead try stylish jeans or slacks, or capri pants for keeping cool in warm weather. In the summer, women wear sun dresses from trendy stores and breathable slacks made of fabrics like linen. Keep it stylish and comfortable.
In business situations, suits are standard; companies will let you know if you can or should wear casual dress. Suits are worn out for after work drinks and entertainment.
For clubbing and nights out, dress casual cool. Japanese women generally do not wear skin tight, super short dresses and cleavage is rarely shown, unless at the beach. Women dressed in tight short dresses and very sexy looks are often stereotyped as sex workers or escorts. When visiting Tokyo, for example, you will see young women and men dressed in subculture styles, such as Harajuku, Lolita, and punk.
If you plan on visiting ahot spring or public bath, they're almost always used nude (except for rare mixed-gender baths). For men, speedos or trunks are fine at a bath that allows bathing suits; for the beach, boardshorts are also okay. For women, a modest swimsuit is better than a skimpy bikini if you're visiting a bath that allows bathing suits; for the beach, bikinis are okay. At public or private pools, you may have to wear a swimming cap; they may be provided for you, or you can bring your own.
Japan in the summer can be extremely warm and humid. The Japanese frequently wipe sweat from their face with a colorfulhandkerchief(ハンカチhankachi), use afan(扇子sensufor a folding fan, 団扇uchiwafor a flat fan) to keep themselves cool, or (for women) useumbrellas(傘kasa) to shade themselves. Purchasing one or all of these items is not only a smart way to stay cool, but can provide a lasting memento from your visit. In historic and tourism areas you will find shops selling beautiful fans and umbrellas. Both are affordable investments, though they can be pricey if you wish to have a real work of art. However, most Japanese use cheap but beautiful fans–many made in China–in their every day life, only to replace them when they become hard to close or worn. Cheap flat paper fans are often distributed for free at festivals and events.
Traditional umbrellas can be bought at gift shops, and stylish umbrellas for rain and shine can be purchased at women's accessory and clothing stores throughout the country. Handkerchiefs are popular for both men or women. Some look like traditional cotton handkerchiefs you'd use to blow your nose, others are small towels. Japan's fabulousdepāto(department stores) carry all colors, makes and models of these necessities. It's an affordable luxury–you can find men's and women's handkerchiefs from high end designers like Yves Saint Laurent and Burberry for ¥1,500 or less. You'll also find locally made versions in gift shops and stores throughout the country. Keep them in your purse or pocket, and wipe your brow when necessary.
Rain umbrellasare often cheap plastic, and available at every convenience store for about ¥500. Since they all look alike, they're sometimes treated as a communal resource. When you go in a store, you leave yours at the door, and when you leave, you simply grab an identical one, whether or not it was the one you brought. Some stores instead have bags to keep your umbrella from dripping on the floor. Hostels usually have umbrellas to lend, as do some other lodgings and businesses. Rather than toting your own umbrella around, you may find it more convenient to buy a cheap one (if you even need to), "donate" it to your hostel, and buy a new one in your next city.
Religious freedom is respected by most Japanese, and people of all faiths are generally able to practise their religion without any major problems. You are expected to dress and behave in a respectful manner whenever you visit religious sites.
As in many other Asian countries, swastikas are Buddhist symbols representing peace and do not represent Nazism or antisemitism in any way, and you will notice the symbol is actually pointing in the opposite direction. Swastikas are often used on maps to mark the locations of Buddhist temples and monasteries.
When visiting a Shinto shrine or a Buddhist temple, follow the appropriatecleansing procedureat thechōzuyaortemizuyabefore you enter. Using your right hand, fill the dipper with water. Rinse your left hand, then your right hand. Then, cup your left hand and fill it with water, using it to rinse your mouth.Do nottouch the dipper directly with your mouth. Spit the water onto the rocks. After that, rinse your left hand one more time. Finally, turn the dipper upright so the remaining water spills down to rinse the handle before returning the dipper.
International dialing prefixes vary from company to company. Check with your operator for more details. For international calls to Japan, the country code is81. Phone numbers in Japan have the format+81 3 1234-5678where "81" is the country code for Japan, the next digits are the dialing zone where the local number is located (can contain from one to three digits) and the remaining digits (six to eight digits) are the "local" part. When calling within Japan, the long-distance prefix (trunk code) is0, and this is usually written in the number, like03-1234-5678; when calling Japan from abroad, leave off the "0". Phone numbers starting with 0120 or 0800 are "free-dial" numbers, and are free to call from any landline (payphones included), while phone numbers starting with 0570 are "navi-dial" numbers, which are variable-rate numbers used by businesses (one number works nationwide, but you are charged based on the distance between your phone and the closest call center operated by the company).
To dial abroad from Japan, theinternational access codeis010(or "+" on mobile phones). You may also need to dial a carrier code before the access code, either 001 (KDDI) or 0033 (NTT).
Emergency calls can be made from any phone (except VoIP phones) free of charge: call110for police or call119for fire and ambulance.
A skeletal network ofpayphones(公衆電話kōshū denwa) is kept as backup for emergencies; train stations are usually the best place to find one. Domestic calls to landlines are ¥10/minute, calls to VoIP numbers (start with 050) are ¥30/minute, calls to mobile phones are ¥40/minute, and international calls are often over ¥100/min. Green phones without displays only support domestic calls, green phones with displays may be domestic or international capable (check the display), and gray phones are mostly international capable, but double-check the display to be sure. Only ¥10 and ¥100 coins and prepaid phone cards are accepted; prepaid cards are cheaper for repeat use as they can often be found at ticket shops near stations for ¥380-420 per 50-unit (=¥500 yen of call credit) card.
Japan has had a tendency to develop technology that's initially superior to what's available elsewhere in the world, but either fails to catch on elsewhere or becomes incompatible with global standards. This has been calledGalápagos syndrome, after the Galápagos Islands and their highly-specialized flora and fauna that led Charles Darwin to develop his theory of evolution.
Japanese mobile phones were the original example of Galápagos syndrome. With e-mail and web browsing available since 1999 and mobile payments since 2004, they were nearly a decade ahead of global competition. But when global standards for messaging, web browsing, and contactless communication were settled, they were incompatible with the existing Japanese technologies. As a result, the Japanese mobile phone market became isolated, and has had comparatively slow adoption of smartphones, which were initially a stepbackwardsfrom Japanese-onlyGara-kei(from "Galápagos" and "keitai") feature phones. The tide has turned, however, and smartphones (スマホsumaho) are taking over.
Mobile phones aren't the only technology to suffer from Galapagosization. IC cards for public transit,keicars, digital television, and car satellite navigation are all examples of widespread technologies in Japan that either never caught on elsewhere, or developed incompatible standards that have left Japan isolated.
Modern Japanesemobile phones(携帯電話keitai denwaor justkeitai) use the global standards for 3G and newer. In a nutshell:
If your phone is up to spec, double-check with your carrier if they have a roaming agreement with one of the major Japanese carriers:NTT Docomo,au,SoftBank, orRakuten Mobile. Coverage is generally excellent unless you are heading to a remote mountainous area.
If your phone is incompatible with frequencies used in Japan but you have a 4G-capable SIM card, you can rent a phone in Japan and slot in your card, allowing you to keep your home phone number in Japan. Carrier restrictions may apply. Be sure to double-check with your network provider before departing. Another option is to buy a used unlocked phone in Japan; second-hand electronics stores are plentiful and a basic unlocked device can be had for as little as ¥3,000. You may also be able to acquire an eSIM (no physical card) with newer smartphones.
For a short visit, your cheapest option for mobile access is torent a phone. A number of companies provide this service, although with the prevalence of smartphones and cheap roaming from nearby countries, this number is shrinking. Rental rates and call charges vary. Incoming calls are free in Japan. Beware of "free" rental as there is a catch: usually, there are very high call charges.
Japanese phones have an email address linked to the phone number, and most of the above companies allow you to send and receive emails. Your usual email provider may offer redirection to another email address (Gmail does), so that you receive all emails on the cellphone. Companies charge for incoming and outgoing emails.
Prepaid phones are widely available, and can be purchased even if your stay is short. For information buying a phone, please seeWorking and studying in Japan.
As much as anywhere else, Japanese use their phones more for texting than phone calls. However, SMS and MMS text messages never caught on in Japan due to surcharges and limitations (even though the limitations have since been eliminated). Instead, Japanese text byemail(which in Japanese is just called メールmēru, without the "E-" prefix) using an email address tied to their mobile phone number.
WhatsApp is not popular in Japan, and most Japanese people use local Japanese appLINEinstead.
Postal services are provided byJapan Post.
You can send postcards to anywhere in the world for ¥100 (some postcards are sold with domestic postage of ¥63 included, so you may only have to pay for a supplemental ¥37 stamp when mailing). Red publicmaildeposit boxes (simply calledposutoポスト) are found throughout Japan. They usually have two slots, one for postcards and small letters, and the other for larger envelopes and overseas and express mail. (Slots are to help them sort mails - it doesn't matter if you choose the wrong slot.)
Courier services(宅配便takuhaibin) are useful for sending packages, documents, and even luggage to/from airports, cities, and hotels. Golf clubs and skis/snowboards can be sent directly to the sporting destination. Couriers guarantee next-day delivery to practically all locations in Japan, excluding Okinawa and other far-flung islands, but including remote rural locations like ski resorts. You can send and receive items at mostconvenience stores, as well as hotels and airports.
The largest courier is Yamato Transport (ヤマト運輸Yamato Un'yū), often calledKuro Neko(黒ねこ "black cat") after their logo, with their service known asTA-Q-BIN (宅急便takkyūbin), to the point that their trademark is often used colloquially to refer to all courier services in general. Other couriers includeSagawa ExpressandNittsu(Nippon Express).
On a PC, there may be several possible ways to switch between Japanese and Roman input:
On Macs, use the英数key (on the bottom, to the left of Spacebar).
For email, the@key is usually on the right side of the keyboard, next toP; several other punctuation characters are moved, as well.
TravelSIM cardswith data can be bought at the airport for ¥6,000, ¥7,000 and ¥8,000 being valid for 8, 16 and 31 days, respectively. Also, inHaneda Airportthere is a machine near the PASMO desk selling SIM cards for ¥4,000 with 6 GB of data for 30 days.Bic Cameramight also have an offer as low as ¥3,000 for a pre-paid SIM card, but any larger electronics shop should sell these travel SIM cards.
Pocket Wi-Fiis another option for Wi-Fi enabled devices (smartphone, iPhone, iPad, laptops, etc.) A Pocket Wi-Fi device is a little smaller than a deck of cards. It makes available a mobile Wi-Fi hotspot you can connect your devices to. You can either rent one from one of the many companies offering rentals, or, depending on your needs, you can DIY one by purchasing a used Pocket WiFi device from a local electronics store and inserting a SIM of your choice. Docomo-branded Pocket WiFi devices will work with any data-only SIM sold in Japan that uses the docomo network, and au-branded devices with model numbers W03, W04, W05, W06, X11, and X12 are sold unlocked and will work with any SIM on any network; an AU W03 supports all Japanese 4G frequency bands and can be had for as little as ¥1,000 while an AU X11 supports all Japanese 4G and 5G frequency bands and can be had for as little as ¥3,000. This small upfront cost allows you to reuse the device every time you visit. Prices at the airport are ¥440 per day with 500 MB included.
Public Wi-Fiavailability can be sufficient enough to avoid expensive SIM cards or Pocket Wi-Fis depending on where you are going. Subway and train stations, and airports generally always have Wi-Fi, and so do central plazas and places frequented by tourists. Many restaurants and cafés, especially if it is a chain, and convenience stores also offer Wi-Fi. To use the Wi-Fi, you will usually have to register your email address, to which an activation link is sent to complete the registration. However, if you don't want to give your email address, the time interval to receive and click the link will always be around 10 min — during that time you can surf freely, even with a fake email address. A simple way of getting around the registration process is the Japan Free Wi-Fi app, which will allow you to connect without having to register every time. There is also some paid public Wi-Fi readily available and can be had for as little as ¥200 a month for one phone fromWi2. A group plan for ¥500 for 5 devices of any kind is also available.
Internet cafés(インターネットカフェ) can be found in or around many train stations. Some cafés will lend you a memory card reader for free. Manga coffee shops (漫画喫茶manga-kissa) usually have Internet PCs. You can browse the web, you can read comic books, watch TV or a variety of movies-on-demand, or play video games. The cost is typically around ¥400/hour, with free (non-alcoholic) drinks, and possibly more. Often they have special night fares of around ¥1,800 for any 8 hours between 22:00 and 08:00. Internet cafés can be a safe and inexpensive place to spend the night if you miss the last train; some will even have "flat seat" areas for this purpose.
Somebusiness hotelshave Internet access available if you have your own computer, sometimes for free. In the big cities it will usually be provided over WiFi, but in some smaller hotels and in more rural areas you may encounter a wired Ethernet connection instead, so have an adapter handy if your computer does not have an Ethernet port. Otherwise, many also tend to have rental or free PCs available for hotel guests.