
The Islamic Republic ofPakistan(Urdu: پاکستان) is a country at the crossroads ofWestern,Central,SouthandEast Asia. Conceived as a separate homeland forMuslimsin South Asia, the country's tourism industry had its heyday during the 1960s thanks to theHippie Trail. Unfortunately, the country has been in a state of flux since the 1970s, with many countries declaring it unsafe to visit.
Despite this, Pakistan continues to attract tourists due to its unique, diverse cultures and landscapes. The history buff can rejoice at the vast number of ruins from ancient civilisations, such as Mohenjo-Daro, Harappa and Taxila; the architecture lover can feast their eyes at Mughal-era architecture; and the adventurous traveller can try their luck at scaling the vast number of mountain peaks, includingK2.
Pakistan is a federal republic consisting of four provinces: Punjab, Sindh, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan. The government of Pakistan also exercisesde factojurisdiction over two parts of the disputed Kashmir region: Azad Kashmir and Gilgit–Baltistan (formerly Northern Areas).

Nine of Pakistan's most notable cities follow. Other cities are listed in the article for their region.

See alsoSacred sites of the Indian sub-continentand theUNESCO World Heritage listings for Pakistan.
Pakistan is the world's 33rd largest country by size. With a population exceeding 207.2 million people, it is the fifth most populous country in the world.
The history of Pakistan can be traced back to the earliest ancient human civilisations in South Asia. The earliest evidence of farming in South Asia is from 7,000 BCE inMehrgarh. Mehrgarh in present-day Balochistan was a small farming village and centre of agriculture in South Asia during New Stone Age period which lasted until its abandonment around 2600 BCE due to climate change and was succeeded byIndus Valley Civilization, a civilization in the early stages of development growing along one of the major rivers of Asia, the Indus. By 2300 BCE, the IVC extended throughout much of what is modern-day Pakistan. It became one of the great civilisations of the ancient world along with Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia. This Bronze Age civilisation with its remarkably sophisticated civil engineering and urban planning become most advanced civilisation of its time which had well-planned towns and well-laid roads, as recorded in its major city ofMohenjo-darowhich today is an archaeological site of immense historical significance. The Indus Valley Civilization declined and disintegrated around 1900 BCE, possibly due to drought and geological disturbances. Most historians believe that the Vedic people were migrants who encountered this civilization in decline and perhaps hastened that decline. The Vedic people eventually occupied most of North India, laid the foundations of Hinduism and flourished in the ancient city of what is today known asTaxila. After the defeat of the firstPersian Empire, Achaemenid, which ruled much of modern Pakistan, Alexander the Great, theHellenisticKing of Macedon, invaded the region of Pakistan and conquered much of the Punjab region for his Macedonian empire.
Prior to the late 18th century, Pakistan was the main Islamic stronghold in theMughal Empire, which at its peak covered the great majority of the Indian subcontinent. The area that now makes up Pakistan kept its status as one of the main cultural and political hubs of South Asia for over 300 years. From the late 18th century until 1947, Pakistan was part of the British Empire, and one can still see the signs of Pakistan's colonial past in most places.
The namePakistanwas used officially after the partition of (British) India into the two nation-states of India and Pakistan in 1947. However, the wordPakistanwas first used by Choudhry Rahmat Ali back in 1933 in his declaration,Now or Never– calling for its separation from the Empire. Afterwards, British-ruled India was divided into the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (with two sections, West and East) and India. Later, East Pakistan seceded and became the separate nation ofBangladesh, as a result of an extremely brutal war which also involved India. A dispute overKashmiris still ongoing between India and Pakistan and has resulted in three wars and many skirmishes, acts of terrorism and an insurgency and counter-insurgency inthe part of Kashmir controlled by India and claimed by Pakistan.
Right after its independence Pakistan was a peaceful, tolerant, progressive and prosperous country and a magnet for international travelers. By the late 1960s Pakistan's tourism industry was flourishing and the country became a hotspot for many young Western travelers and the hippie types. In the absence of political and ethnic violence and terrorism Pakistan showed the image of a cosmopolitan, orderly country but by the 1980s the reputation of Pakistan had changed drastically, and today it is a very different place from what it used to be.
Today Pakistan is populated mostly by people whose ancestors originated from various other places – including Arabs from after the Islamic expeditions, Persians from Bukhara and Samarkand, Turks from Central Asia – and the native Sindhus whose ancestors converted to Islam. Ethnic groups such as Punjabis, Sindhis, Seraikis, Pashtuns, Mohajirs and Balochs all have different native languages, cultures and histories.
India and Pakistan have a bitter and long-standing dispute over Kashmir; each government claims territory that is under the control of the other. Put short, the dispute originated when the Muslim-majority princely state ruled by Hindu aristocrats remained undecided during the partition of British India. Both countries have fought 4 major wars and more skirmishes since their independence.
Wikivoyage, however, dealsonlywith the current situation on the ground; our maps show and our text describes that situation without taking sides in the dispute. If you can go there with a Pakistani visa today then we treat it as being in Pakistan, and if you need an Indian visa, we treat it as being in India. This is the most important distinction for travellers.
Most of the Pakistani-controlled part of Kashmir (Azad KashmirandGilgit-Baltistan) is safer than most of the rest of Pakistan, but travellers should check current conditions before visiting Kashmir and be wary of areas close to the Line of Control (the de facto border). Both governments consider these areas highly sensitive, keep large military forces in them, and restrict travel to them.
Pakistan is strategically located astride the ancient trade routes of theKhyberandBolanpasses toCentral Asia. Another pass, which now has theKarakoram Highwaythrough it, leads to Western China. All these passes, and some ports in Pakistan, formed part of the ancientSilk Roadwhich linked Asia and Europe.
Located along the Arabian Sea, Pakistan is surrounded byAfghanistanto the northwest,Iranto the southwest,Indiato the east, andChinato the northeast. Pakistan has its own unique character but also has many commonalities with neighbouring nations, especiallyAfghanistanandIndia.
Pakistan is one of those few countries in the world that has every kind of geological structure. It has the sea, desert (Sindh & Punjab), green mountains (North West Province), dry mountains (Balochistan), mountains covered with snow, rivers, rich land to cultivate (Punjab & Sindh), water resources, waterfalls, and forests. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Gilgit-Baltistan contain the mountain ranges of the Himalayas, the Karakoram, and the Hindu Kush. Pakistan's highest point is K2, which, at 8,611 metres, is the second highest peak in the world. The Punjab province is a flat, alluvial plain whose rivers eventually join the Indus River and flow south to the Arabian Sea. Sindh lies between the Thar Desert and the Rann of Kutch to the east, and the Kirthar range to the west. The Balochistan Plateau is arid and surrounded by dry mountains. Pakistan experiences frequent earthquakes, occasionally severe, especially in the north and the west.
Mostly hot, dry desert; temperate in northwest; arctic in north.  Flooding along the Indus after heavy rains (July and August). Fertile and sub humid heat in the Punjab region.
The climate varies from tropical to temperate, with arid conditions in the coastal south. There is a monsoon season with frequent flooding due to heavy rainfall, and a dry season with significantly less rainfall or none at all. There are four distinct seasons: a cool, dry winter from December through February; a hot, dry spring from March through May; the summer rainy season, or southwest monsoon period, from June through September; and the retreating monsoon period of October and November. Rainfall varies greatly from year to year, and patterns of alternate flooding and drought are common.
Pakistan is theoretically a democratic, parliamentary federal republic modelled on the British Westminster system, with Islam as the state religion. The President, indirectly elected, is the Head of State, but his position is primarily ceremonial. The Prime Minister and his cabinet run the government. The Parliament is bicameral. The National Assembly, the lower house, is directly elected by universal adult franchise, while the Senate is the upper house and indirectly elected. The National Assembly is the more powerful of the two, primarily because a majority in the National Assembly is required to form a government and pass budgets. Pakistan has a lot of political parties, and no party is able to secure a majority in the National Assembly, leading to unstable governments, short-lived political alliances and raucous politics. Pakistan has a strong and independent judiciary and a free press.
However, political instability has resulted in (or some would say, has been partially caused by) a high degree of military control in Pakistan. Most of the prime ministers have been influenced by the chief of the Pakistani army in major decisions related to foreign policy, and there have been periods of outright military dictatorship in the past.
Pakistan is also aFederalRepublic, divided into provinces. Each of these has its own legislature, with a government run by a chief minister and a cabinet.
Street demonstrations and political agitations occur, as they do in any democracy. There is also occasional low-level violence, but a visitor has a vanishingly small chance of getting caught in that. Terrorism is a bigger problem, though. It can occur anywhere, and some parts of the country are too dangerous to visit because of the great risks in those areas (see "Stay safe").
Ramadan is the 9th and holiest month in the Islamic calendar and lasts 29–30 days. Muslims fast every day for its duration and most restaurants will be closed until the fast breaks at dusk. Nothing (including water and cigarettes) is supposed to pass through the lips from dawn to sunset. Non-Muslims are exempt from this, but should still refrain from eating or drinking in public as this is considered very impolite. Working hours are decreased as well in the corporate world.
Exact dates of Ramadan depend on local astronomical observations and may vary somewhat from country to country. Ramadan concludes with the festival ofEid al-Fitr, which may last several days, usually three in most countries.
If you're planning to travel to Pakistan during Ramadan, consider readingTravelling during Ramadan.
Pakistan, being home to numerous ethnic groups is a culturally diverse nation that emphasizes both local culture and traditions and the traditional Islamic values. The culture is greatly influenced by Northern India, Afghanistan and Iran.
While Islam is the state religion, and adhered to by the overwhelming majority of Pakistanis, there are also Christian, Hindu and Sikh minorities.
Legally women and men have equal rights under the law in Pakistan, however society is largely patriarchal and women are particularly mistreated in rural areas, where their access to education and employment remains limited.
Nevertheless, women have played a prominent role in the development of the country in government, education, services, health as well as the military. Benazir Bhutto was the first female premier of Pakistan, and the first democratically elected female leader of a Muslim country and women have served in many other prominent areas in politics. The Pakistan Air Force has also started to employ female fighter pilots.
At the federal level,UrduandEnglishare the official languages of Pakistan. Urdu serves as thelingua francaof Pakistan. Urdu is very similar toHindi, but is written in the Arabic script, and incorporates more loan words from Arabic and Persian than Hindi.
Punjabiis the native language of roughly 37% of the population. Unlike in India, Punjabi is written using the Shahmukhi alphabet, another variant of the Arabic script, in Pakistan.
Other languages spoken throughout the country arePashto,Sindhi,Saraiki,Balochi,Pothohari,Hindko,Brahui,Khowar,Shina,Burushaski,Wakhi, and so on.
Fluency in English varies vastly depending on education levels, occupation, age and region. English is widely spoken among affluent sectors of the population in major cities and around most tourist places, as well as in most police stations and government offices.
Thee-visa systemis opened for citizens of 191 countries. It is unclear whether this is for airports only or includes land borders.
Citizens of 24 "Tourist Friendly Countries" (TFC) are eligible for one month visas on arrival if they travel through a designated/authorised tour operator who will assume responsibility for them while in the country. Any extensions of this type of visa must also be done through the tour operator. They include:Austria,Belgium,Canada,China,Denmark,Finland,France,Germany,Greece,Iceland,Italy,Japan,South Korea,Luxembourg,Malaysia,Netherlands,Norway,Portugal,Singapore,Spain,Sweden,Thailand,United KingdomandUnited States.
Nationals of most other countries, and those not wanting to travel with a tour operator and group, need to apply in advance for a visa, which are usually issued for 30–90 days depending on nationality and where you apply. Double-entries are sometimes given, but be clear and persistent that you need this when applying. Visas for Pakistan are usually easier to obtain in your home country as the missions around the world have been given more authority to issue visas without checking with Islamabad, which should help in getting applications turned around quicker.
A handful of countries are issued visas on arrival:IcelandandMaldivesfor 3 months,Hong Kong,NepalandSamoafor 1 month, whileTongaandTrinidad and Tobagonationals can stay for an unlimited amount of time.
Citizens of some countries can obtainbusiness visason arrival at major airports (Islamabad, Lahore, Peshawar, Quetta or Karachi) if their local host company either obtain an approval from the immigration authorities or arrange an invitation letter duly recommended by the concerned trade organizations in Pakistan. A recommendation letter issued by the Chamber of Commerce & Industry is also acceptable.
People of Pakistani originliving overseas are granted 5 year multiple entry visas (along with their spouses), valid for single stays of up to 1 year. Visas aren't required at all if they are holding a Pakistan Origin Card (POC) or a National Identity Card for Overseas Pakistanis (NICOP).
Nationals ofIsraelare not allowed entryas Israel is not recognised as a nation by Pakistan (and most other Muslim countries), but there is no restriction on Jews holding passports from other nations. Despite much on-line information to the contrary, Israeli stamps and visas would usually pose no problems for entry into Pakistan, though you may be subject to more stringent questioning by immigration officers. And while under normal circumstances visas can not be obtained by Israeli passport holders, there have been exceptions in which nationals of Israel have been admitted to Pakistan after obtaining an NOC from the Ministry of Interior in Islamabad beforehand, which they then submitted along with an application for a Pakistani visa.
Nationals of Afghanistan are refused entry if their passports or tickets show evidence of transit or boarding in India.
The Pakistan Consulate inIstanbuldoes not issue visas unless you are a resident ofTurkey, although it may be possible inAnkara.
The consulate inZahedaninIranno longer issues visas, head for the embassy inTehran.
As of January 2018, applications for tourist visas in Delhi are refused to everyone, regardless of the nationality.
As of May 2019, the Embassy of Pakistan in Bishkek will sometimes grant visas to non-Kyrgyz citizens. The paperwork is extensive but turnaround is fast, 2–3 days in practice.
A Pakistani visa will not be granted to an Indian national unless the Ministry of Interior inIslamabadapproves. The approval process is notoriously lengthy and highly selective; many endure months or even years of waiting, only to face potential disappointment. The process depends a lot on references.
Contrary to reports, Indian citizens arenotgranted Pakistani tourist visas.
Karachi,Lahore, andIslamabadare the main gateways to Pakistan by air. Nine other international airports are inQuetta,Peshawar,Sialkot,Multan,Faisalabad,Gawadar,Rahim Yar Khan,Dera Ghazi KhanandSkardu. Karachi, Lahore and Islamabad all served by many international airliners and have direct connections from Europe, North America, Middle East and Southeast Asia.
Pakistan's national carrier Pakistan International Airlines provides good connectivity within the country as well to major hubs around the world. PIA was once one of the most reputable airlines in the world, but is now suffering due to bad governance. It is still the largest airline of the country and serves the most destinations, both local and international.
PIA has direct connections with Abu Dhabi, Baku, Bahrain, Beijing, Dubai, Doha, Istanbul, Jeddah,  Kuwait, Kuala Lumpur, Riyadh. Sharjah, Medina, Muscat, Riyadh, and Toronto-Pearson.
British Airways has a direct service from London to Islamabad and Lahore, while Virgin Atlantic has services from London and Manchester to Islamabad and from London to Lahore.
Most flights and airlines originate from Gulf countries, where most of the overseas Pakistan work, and those flights are often reasonably priced. Other than flag carrier PIA, private airlines such as Airblue and Serene Air also operate flights from numerous Gulf destinations.
Pakistan has train links with India and Iran, though none of these trains are the quickest and most practical way to enter Pakistan. Should speed be a priority it is better to take the bus, or if you are really in a hurry, to fly, however the trains are sights in their own right.
FromIndia:
FromIran: There is only one link, fromZahedantoQuetta. This link was suspended around 2014 for passengers. Local media reported that reinstatement was due as of September 2018, but this did not prove to be the case and while there is freight traffic on the line, there has been no resumption of passenger service as of January 2025 according to local information. Sandstorms frequently block the tracks and cause severe delays.
From ancient times people have been travelling through Pakistan using theGrand Trunk Roadand theSilk Roadthat run through Pakistan and into theIndian subcontinent. It's a rewarding but time consuming way to see this part of the world. New highways have been developed and the country is due for an expansion in its highway network. A world-class motorway connects the cities ofPeshawar,Islamabad,Lahore,MultanandFaisalabadbut drivers' behaviour is still poor and capriciously policed.
FromChina:Pakistan is connected toChinaby theKarakoram Highway, a modern feat of engineering that traverses a remarkably scenic route through the Karakoram and Himalayan mountains. Plans are in place for this highway to be expanded from its current width of 10 m to 30 m as a result of the increase in trade traffic due to Gwader port opening.
FromAfghanistan:
From India: There isinternational bus servicerunning fromDelhitoLahore, which includes meals for₹2400. You cannot buy the ticket on the spot, rather you will need to show up a few days before at Delhi Gate with photocopies of your Pakistani and Indian visas. The bus leaves at 06:00 but you will need to be at Delhi Gate at 04:00 to check in. Tourists report that is just as fast, much more flexible, and much cheaper to take the journey by stringing together local transport and crossing the border on foot.
From China: You can take a bus fromKashgarover theKarakoram Highwayto Pakistan.
From Iran:
In theory there is a third crossing that could be used on the Pishin-Mand route for those without transport, but no reports of attempts to do so have yet been received.
Getting around Pakistan has becomemucheasier with the completion of some motorways, and an increase in private airlines. Whilst the cities are well covered, roads in rural areas are not, with many minor roads missing - Google Maps in particular has a worrying habit of marking dried up river beds as minor roads, so if you're exploring out in the sticks, it's a good idea to use Google Earth to double check your route.
Pakistan International Airlines(PIA) serves numerous domestic destinations and is the only airline to serve the three airports in the north of interest to trekkers or climbers:Chitral,Gilgit, andSkardu. There are usually two flights from Islamabad to these cities daily, but they are often cancelled due to bad weather, and often over-booked—show up early to guarantee a seat.
Other domestic carriers includeSereneAirandAirblue.
Pakistan Railwaysprovides passenger rail service. The stations tend not to have their timetables in English, but sales agents can usually explain everything to you. There are several different classes of fares depending on amenities.
Air-Conditioned Sleeper class is the most expensive class, where the fares are almost at par with airfares. Bedding is included with the fare and this air-conditioned coach is present only on popular routes between Karachi to Lahore. The sleeper berths are extremely wide and spacious and the coaches are carpeted.
A large portion of travel between cities in Pakistan is carried out by bus. Travel by bus is often the cheapest and most convenient alternative. The Daewoo company runs a regular bus service between several major cities, with air-conditioned buses and seats booked one day ahead. While rather inexpensive, they are still almost five times as expensive as the cheap and uncomplicated rides offered by minibuses or larger buses between the major bus stations of the cities. On the regular bus services, fares are often (though not always) paid directly on the bus, there is no air-conditioning, and sometimes very little knee space, but you get where you are going all the same. You'll also probably benefit from kind interest and friendly conversation on many rides. Buses leave almost incessantly from the major bus stations for all the major cities, and many smaller locations, so booking ahead is neither possible nor necessary on the simpler buses. When travelling between major cities, smaller buses are to be preferred over the larger ones, as the larger ones tend to pick up passengers along the way and, therefore, travel more slowly.
The situation is similar for local transport. While the organization of local transport may look a little different between cities, there is usually an active bus service running throughout each city, with varying levels of government control.
You can purchase bus tickets online with theBookkarubooking engine.
Major bus companies operating intercity buses in Pakistan areFaisal Movers,Skyways[dead link]&Niazi Express.
In Pakistan, traffic is left-hand drive and the traffic culture is very different from the West. The 350 km of highway between Islamabad and Lahore is in good condition, but most of the road network is in poor condition compared to roads in the West. Traffic can be dangerous and chaotic. Many drivers do not have a driving licence or insurance. Avoid driving after dark.
Pakistan's attractions range from the ruins of civilisations such as Mohenjo-daro, Harappa and Taxila, to the Himalayan hill stations, which attract visitors not only from across the country but also from all over the world who are interested in winter sports and natural beauty. Pakistan is home to several mountain peaks over 7,000 m, especially K2 and is a hotspot for adventurers and mountaineers. Along with natural beauty, the northern part of the country also offer ancient architecture such as old fortresses. The Hunza and Chitral valley are home to small pre-Islamic Animist Kalasha communities claiming descent from Alexander the Great, while the romance of the historic Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province is timeless and legendary. Punjab province has the site of Alexander's battle on the Jhelum River and the historic city of Lahore. Lahore is Pakistan's cultural capital, with many examples of Mughal architecture such as Badshahi Masjid, Shalimar Gardens, the Tomb of Jahangir and the Lahore Fort. The cultural and physical diversity of Pakistan should have advanced it into a tourist hot spot for foreigners, but numbers have diminished in this century due to security fears and low standards of service and cleanliness.
Post-independence Pakistan retained its heritage by constructing various sites to commemorate its independence by blending various styles and influences from the past.
Pakistan has six major cultural sites that are categorised as UNESCO World Heritage Sites. These include the archaeological ruins of the Indus Valley Civilization atMoenjodaro,  the 1st century Buddhist Ruins at Takht-i-Bahi and neighbouring city remains at Sahr-i-Bahlol, the ruins ofTaxilafrom the Gandhara Civilization, the Lahore Fort and Shalimar Gardens inLahore, the monuments of the ancient city of Thatta and the ancient fort of Rohtas.
Pakistan is a profound blend of landscapes varying from plains to deserts, forests, hills, and plateaus ranging from the coastal areas of the Arabian Sea in the south to the mountains of the Karakoram range in the north. Pakistan's northern areas especiallyGilgit-BaltistanandNorthern side of Khyber Pakhtunkhwaare full of natural beauty and include parts of the Hindu Kush, the Karakoram Range, and the Himalayas. This area has some of the world's highest mountain includes such famous peaks as K2 (Mount Godwin Austen, at 8,611 m, the second highest mountain in the world). Five peaks over 8,000 m, many over 7,000 m, and the largest glaciers outside the polar region. More than one-half of the summits are over 4,500 m, and more than fifty peaks reach above 6,500 mPakistan's administered Azad Kashmir is rich in natural beauty. Its snow-covered peaks, forests, rivers, streams, valleys, velvet green plateaus and climate varying from Arctic to tropical, join together to make it an excellent tourist attraction. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa is known as the tourist hotspot for adventurers and explorers. The province has a varied landscape ranging from rugged mountains, valleys, hills and dense agricultural farms. Pakistan has some 29 national parks.
Popular monuments in Pakistan are:
In Pakistan, there are museums from archaeological and historical to biographical, from heritage to military, from natural history to transport – nearly every big city has a museum worth visiting. The highest concentrations of these museums are found in the largest cities, but none compare to Lahore, home to Lahore Museum. Karachi also has an array of some good museums, including the National Museum of Pakistan, State Bank of Pakistan Museum & Art Gallery, MagnifiScience Centre, PAF Museum and Pakistan Maritime Museum. For those looking out for a transport museum, Pakistan Railways Heritage Museum in Islamabad is a major attraction.
Pakistan is a world class destination for trekking and hiking. Gilgit-Baltistan is a "mountain paradise" for mountaineers, trekkers, and tourists. The region has some of the world's highest mountains, including five peaks over 8,000 m, many over 7,000 m, and the largest glaciers outside the polar region.
Horse riding is also very affordable. Cycling opportunities abound.
For water-based activities fans, Karachi is the only place in the country to head for. From snorkeling, scuba diving, boating, fishing, and even cruise dining.
You can also shop to your heart's content, in massive range of markets and bazaars without worrying about your budget, as a survey found Karachi as the world's most cheapest city.
As of January 2025:
Exchange rates fluctuate. Current rates for these and other currencies are available fromXE.com
The national currency of Pakistan is thePakistani rupee, denoted asRs(ISO codePKR). The rupee is subdivided into 100 paise (singular: paisa). "5 rupees 75 paise" would normally be written as Rs"5.75". It is always good to have a number of small bills on hand, as merchants and drivers sometimes have no change. A useful technique is to keep small denomination notes (Rs 10-100) in your wallet or in a pocket, and to keep larger denomination notes (Rs 500-5,000) separate. Then, it will not be obvious how much money you have. Many small merchants will claim that they don't have change for a Rs 500 or 1,000 note. This is often a lie so that they are not stuck with a large note. It is best not to buy unless you have exact change.
Coins are issued in denominations of Rs 1, 2, 5 and 10. Coins are useful for buying tea, for beggars, and for giving exact change for bus fare or auto-rickshaw. Banknotes come in denominations of Rs10 (green), 20 (orange green), 50 (purple), 100 (red), 500 (deep green), 1,000 (dark blue), and 5,000 (mustard). There is also a Rs 75 banknote, but is treated more as a collector's item than as circulating currency.
ATMsexist in most areas but only very few accept international cards such as American Express, MasterCard and Visa. Look out forStandard Chartered Bankas this is one of the rare exceptions. (December 2022)
It's usually best to get your foreign currency converted to rupees before you make purchases (of course that's only applicable if you're planning to buy with cash not a credit card). A number of licensed currency exchange companies operate, and a passport might be required as an identification document but this requirement is often ignored. Currency exchange shops can easily found in major shopping areas. Be sure to say the amount you wish to exchange and ask for the 'best quote' as rates displayed on the board are often negotiable, especially for larger amounts.
Most large department stores and souvenir shops, and all upmarket restaurants and hotels accept major credit cards such as American Express, MasterCard and Visa cards. Some small shops will want to pass on their 2-3% merchant charge to you. In many cities and towns, credit cards are accepted at retail chain stores and other restaurants and stores. Small businesses and family-run stores almost never accept credit cards, so it is useful to keep a moderate amount of cash on hand.
Rates for exchanging rupees overseas are often poor, although places with significant Pakistani populations (e.g. Dubai) can give decent rates. Try to get rid of any spare rupees before you leave the country.
Most ATMs will dispense up to 50,000 in each transaction. HBL, MCB Bank, National Bank of Pakistan and United Bank, all are the biggest bank in Pakistan and have the most ATMs. They accept most international cards at a nominal charge. International banks like Standard Chartered have a significant presence in major Pakistan cities. It is always worthwhile to have bank cards or credit cards from at least two different providers to ensure that you have a backup available in case one card is suspended by your bank or simply does not work work at a particular ATM.
Pakistanis commonly uselakhandcrorefor 100,000 and 10,000,000 respectively. Though these terms come from Sanskrit, they have been adopted so deeply into Pakistani English that most people are not aware that they are not standard in other English dialects. You may also find non-standard, although standard in Pakistan, placement of commas while writing numerals. One crore rupees would be written as 1,00,00,000, so first time you place a comma after three numerals, then after every two numerals. This format may puzzle you till you start thinking in terms of lakhs and crores, after which it will seem natural.
Pakistan, and particularly Karachi, features in surveys as one of the cheapest places in the world to shop. It has a wide range of markets and bazaars and things to buy without worrying about blowing your budget:
In general shops are open 09:00-23:00 in the large cities. They open and close for business earlier in the smaller towns and rural areas.
In Pakistan, you areexpectedto negotiate the pricewith street hawkers but not in department stores. If not, you risk overpaying many times, which can be okay if you think that it is cheaper than at home. In most of the big cities, retail chain stores are popping up where the shopping experience is essentially identical to similar stores in the West. Although you will pay a little more at these stores, you can be confident that what you are getting is not a cheap knockoff. The harder youbargain, the more you save money. A few tries later, you will realise that it is fun.
Often, the more time you spend in a store, the better deals you will get. It is worth spending time getting to know the owner, asking questions, and getting him to show you other products (if you are interested). Once the owner feels that he is making a sufficient profit from you, he will often give you additional goods at a rate close to his cost, rather than the common "foreigner rate". You will get better prices and service by buying many items in one store than by bargaining in multiple stores individually.  If you see local people buying in a store, probably. you can get the real Pakistani prices. Ask someone around you quietly, "How much would you pay for this?"
Most visitors will find Pakistan quite cheap, although it is noticeably more expensive than neighbouring Afghanistan. Karachi is also generally more expensive than the rest of the country. At the other end of the spectrum, luxury hotels and air fares are comparatively affordable, with even the fanciest 5-star hotels costing less than Rs20,000/night.
Tippingis considered a good practice in Pakistan. Hotel porters, taxi drivers, delivery men will appreciate a small tip if you have been provided with exemplary service.
Pakistani cuisine is a refined blend of various regional cooking traditions of South Asia. Pakistani cuisine is known for its richness, having aromatic and sometimes spicy flavors, and some dishes often contain liberal amounts of oil which contributes to a richer, fuller mouthfeel and flavour. Food in Pakistan is a blend of Mughal, Afghan, Central Asian and Persian influences. There is a good chance that you'd have tasted it in your country, as Indian food and Pakistan food often served together in a restaurant. Cuisine in Pakistan varies greatly from region to region. The "Pakistani food" served by many so-called Pakistani or Indian restaurants in the Western hemisphere is inspired by specifically Mughlai cuisine, a style developed by the royal kitchens of the historical Mughal Empire, and the regional cuisine of the Punjab, although degree of authenticity in relation to actual Mughlai or Punjabi cooking is sometimes variable at best and dubious at worst. Within Pakistan, cuisine varies greatly from region to region, reflecting the country's ethnic and cultural diversity. Food from the eastern provinces of Punjab and Sindh and Mughlai cuisine are similar to the cuisines of Northern India and can be highly seasoned and spicy with vegetarian options, which is characteristic of the flavours of the South Asian region. Food in other parts of Pakistan, particularly Balochistan, Azad Kashmir, Gilgit-Baltistan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, involves the use of mild aromatic spices with more meat and more oil, similar to the cuisines of neighbouring Afghanistan, Iran, and Central Asia. Due to Muslim beliefs, pork is a banned item in Pakistan and is neither consumed nor sold.
Pakistani main course foods which mostly consist of curry dishes are eaten with either flatbread – also called wheat bread – or rice. Salad is generally taken as a side dish with the main course, rather than as an appetizer beforehand. Assorted fresh fruit or sometimes desserts are consumed at the end of a meal. Meat plays a much more dominant role in Pakistani food compared to other South Asian cuisines. According to a 2003 report, an average Pakistani consumed three times more meat than an average Indian. Of all the meats, the most popular are goat or mutton, beef and chicken, particularly for kebab dishes or the classic beef shank dish nihari. Seafood is generally not consumed in large amounts. Food tends range from mild to spicy depending on where you are and who your cook is. So state your preference before beginning to eat. In general, most of the food that you find in the high end hotels is also available in the markets (but European-style food is generally reserved for the former).
Pakistani food has a well-deserved reputation for being hot, owing to the Pakistani penchant for the liberal use of a variety of spices, and potent fresh green chilis or red chili powder that will bring tears to the eyes of the uninitiated. The degree of spiciness varies widely throughout the country: Punjab food is famously fiery, while Northern Areas cuisine is quite mild in taste.
To enjoy the local food, start slowly. Don't try everything at once. After a few weeks, you can get accustomed to spicy food. If you would like to order your dish not spicy, simply say so. Most visitors are tempted to try at least some of the spicy concoctions, and most discover that the sting is worth the trouble.
Cuisine in Pakistan varies greatly from region to region. Culinary art in Pakistan comprises a mix of Iranian, Afghan, Indian, and Central Asian influences that reflect the country's history as well as the variation of cooking practices from across the country. Urban centres of the country offer an amalgamation of recipes from all parts of the country, while food with specific local ingredients and tastes is available in rural areas and villages. Besides the main dishes of salan, with or without meat and cooked with vegetables or lentils, there are a number of provincial specialities such as karahi, biryani, and tikka, in various forms and flavours, eaten alongside a variety of breads such as naan, chapati, and roti.
Pakistani cuisine is a blend of cooking traditions from different regions of the Indian subcontinent, originating from the royal kitchens of sixteenth-century Mughal emperors. It has similarities to North Indian cuisine, although Pakistan has a greater variety of meat dishes and tends to use oil as opposed to ghee. Pakistani cooking uses large quantities of spices, herbs and seasoning. Garlic, ginger, turmeric, red chilli and garam masala are used in most dishes, and home cooking regularly includes curry. Chapati, a thin flat bread made from wheat, is a staple food, served with curry, meat, vegetables and lentils. Rice is also common; it is served plain or fried with spices and is also used in sweet dishes.
Pakistan is wheat growing land, so you have Pakistani breads (known as roti), including chapatti (unleavened bread), paratha (pan-fried layered roti), naan (cooked in a clay tandoori oven), puri (deep-fried and puffed up bread), and many more. A typical meal consists of one or more gravy dishes along with rotis, to be eaten by breaking off a piece of roti, dipping it in the gravy and eating them together. Most of the Pakistani heartland survives on naan, roti, rice, and lentils (dal), which are prepared in several different ways and made spicy to taste. Served on the side, you will usually find spiced yogurt (raita) and either fresh chutney or a tiny piece of exceedingly pungent pickle (achar), a very acquired taste for most visitors – try mixing it with curry, not eating it plain.
Pakistanis eat breads made of wheat flour as a staple part of their daily diet. Pakistan has a wide variety of breads, often prepared in a traditional clay oven called a tandoor. The tandoori style of cooking is common throughout rural and urban Pakistan and has strong roots in neighboring Iran and Afghanistan as well.
The types of flatbread (collectively referred to as Naan) are:
As you might have noticed, 'Naan' is usually used to pick up liquid and soft foods like shorba in curries and beans. Forks and knives not commonly used during meals in Pakistan (unless someone is eating rice or is dining out).  Attempting to cut a naan with a knife  may elicit some amusement around you. Watching others may help.
There are too many shorbas, or sauces/soups, to enumerate.
Popular and commons veg dishes are:
Other dishes include Aloo gobi, Baingan, Karela, Bhindi and Saag
Various kinds of pulses, or legumes, make up an important part of the Pakistani dishes. While lentils (called daal), and chick peas (called channa) are popular ingredients in homestyle cooking, they are traditionally considered to be an inexpensive food sources. Because of this reason, they are typically not served to guests who are invited for dinner or during special occasions. Combining meat with lentils and pulses, whether in simple preparations or in elaborate dishes such as haleem, is also a distinctively Pakistani touch not commonly seen in neighbouring India where a substantial number of its population are vegetarians.
Pakistan is a major consumer of rice. Basmati is the most popular type of rice consumed in Pakistan. Rice dishes are very popular throughout Pakistan. The rice dishes are sometimes eaten mixed with other dishes.
The most simple dish of Pakistani cuisine is Plain cooked rice (Chawal) eaten with Dal (Lentil). Khichdi is Plain cooked rice cooked with Dal. The Karhi chawal is Plain cooked rice eaten with Karhi.
Biryani is a very popular dish in Pakistan, is cooked with pieces of beef, lamb, chicken, fish or shrimp. and has many varieties such as Lahori and Sindhi biryani. Tahiri, which is also a form of vegetarian biryani, is also popular. All of the main dishes (except those made with rice) are eaten alongside bread. To eat, a small fragment of bread is torn off with the right hand and used to scoop and hold small portions of the main dish. Pickles made out of mangoes, carrots, lemon, etc. are also commonly used to further spice up the food. Biryani smells more nice from the saffron and other seasonings added.
In the Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa, feasts using mountains of spiced rice combined with pieces of slowly roasted lamb are often served for guests of honour. These kind of pulaos often contain dried fruit, nuts, and whole spices such as cloves, saffron and cardamom. Such rice dishes have their origins in Central Asia and the Middle East.
Dishes made with rice include many varieties of pulao:
Meat plays a much more dominant role in Pakistani cuisine compared to the other South Asian cuisines and is a major ingredient in most of the Pakistani dishes. The meat dishes in Pakistan include: bovine, ovine, poultry and seafood dishes. The meat is usually cut in 3 cm cubes and cooked as stew. The minced meat is used for Kebabs, Qeema and other meat dishes. Of all the meats, the most popular are goat or mutton, beef and chicken and is particularly sought after as the meat of choice for kebab dishes or the classic beef shank dish nihari. The meat dishes are also cooked with pulses, legumes and rice.
Tandoori chicken, prepared in a clay oven called a tandoor, is probably the best-known Pakistani dish originated in Pakistani Punjab.
The variety is endless, but here are a few examples:
Meat and grilled meat has played an important part in Pakistan region for centuries. Sajji is a Baluchi dish from Western Pakistan, made of lamb with spices, that has also become popular all over the country. Another Balochi meat dish involves building a large outdoor fire and slowly cooking chickens. The chickens are placed on skewers which are staked into the ground in close proximity to the fire, so that the radiant heat slowly cooks the prepared chickens.
Kebabs are a staple item in Pakistani cuisine today, and one can find countless varieties of kebabs all over the country. Each region has its own varieties of kebabs but some like the Seekh kebab, Chicken Tikka, and Shami kebab are especially popular varieties throughout the country. Generally, kebabs from Balochistan and the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa tend to be identical to the Afghan style of barbecue, with salt and coriander being the only seasoning used. Regional kebab recipes from Karachi and the wider Sindh region is famous for its spicy kebabs, often marinated in a mixture of spices, lemon juice and yogurt. Barbecued food is also extremely popular in some cities of Punjab such as Lahore, Gujranwala and Sialkot.
Pakistani cuisine is rich with different kebabs. Meat including beef, chicken, lamb and fish is used in kababs. Some popular kebabs are:
Other dishes include Chargha, Dhaga kabab, Gola kebab, Reshmi kebab and Sajji.
Popular desserts include Peshawari ice cream, Sheer Khurma, Kulfi, Falooda, Kheer, Rasmalai, Phirni, Zarda, Shahi Tukray and Rabri. Sweetmeats are consumed on various festive occasions in Pakistan. Some of the most popular are gulab jamun, barfi, ras malai, kalakand, jalebi, and panjiri. Pakistani desserts also include a long list of halvah such as Multani, sohan halvah, and hubshee halvah.
Kheer made of roasted seviyaan (vermicelli) instead of rice is popular during Eid ul-Fitr. Gajraila is a sweet made from grated carrots, boiled in milk, sugar, green cardamom, and topped with nuts and dried fruit and is very popular in the country during winter season.
Apart from local restaurants, international fast food chains have also popped up throughout Pakistan. They include, KFC, Pizza Hut, McDonald's, Subway, Nandos, Mr.Cod, Papa Johns, Dominoes etc. There are more European chains than North American.
Pakistani snacks comprise food items in Pakistan that are quick to prepare, spicy, usually fried, and eaten in the evening or morning with tea or with any one of the meals as a side-dish. A given snack may be part of a local culture, and its preparation and/or popularity can vary from place to place. These snacks are often prepared and sold by hawkers on footpaths, bazaars, railway stations and other such places, although they may also be served at restaurants. Some typical snacks are dahi bhala, chaat, chana masala, Bun kebab, pakora, and papar. Others include katchauri, pakoras-either neem pakoras or besan (chickpea) pakoras,gol gappay, samosas—vegetable or beef, bhail puri or daal seu and egg rolls. Nuts, such as pistachios and pine nuts, are also often eaten at home. These snacks often smaller than a regular meal, generally eaten between meals.
Popular condiments used in Pakistani cuisine:
Tipping is expected everywhere in Pakistan, especially restaurants. Tip 5-10% at sit-down places.
In Pakistan eating with your hand (instead of cutlery like forks and spoons) is very common. There's one basic rule of etiquette to observe, particularly in non-urban Pakistan: use only your right hand. Wash your hands well before and after eating, of course.
For breads for all types, the basic technique is to hold down the item with your forefinger and use your middle-finger and thumb to tear off pieces. The pieces can then be dipped in sauce or used to pick up bits before you stuff them in your mouth. Unlike India, a spoon is commonly used in Pakistan for eating rice dishes.
Tap water is unsafe for drinking. However, some establishments have water filters/purifiers installed, making it safe to drink. Ask for bottled water, and make sure that the cap's seal has not been broken. Some unscrupulous vendors reuse old bottles and fill them with tap water. Bottled water brands like Aquafina (by PepsiCo) and Nestle are widely available and costs Rs80 for a 1.5 litre bottle. Ask for bottled water wherever possible, and avoid anything cold that might have water (ice) in it. In semi-urban or rural areas, it may be advisable to ask for boiled water.
Try a local limca cola, which makes a "pop" sound when opened. Pakola, Pakistan's premier soft drink brand, is available in many unusual flavours. Try a Lassi, a classic yoghurt drink served either plain or sweet and sometimes flavoured or even fused with fresh fruit. Rooh-Afza, a red-coloured, sweet, herbal drink. Sugar Cane Juice – which is extracted by mechanical force – is best when served fresh. You might also love the Falouda and Gola Ganda, which include various kinds of syrups in crushed ice.
In the warmer southern region, sweet drinks are readily available throughout the day. Look for street vendors that have fruits (real or decorations) hanging from their roofs. Also, some milk/yogurt shops servelassi. Ask formeethi lassifor a sweet yogurt drink and you can also get a salty lassi which tastes good and is similar to the ArabicLabanif you are having "bhindi" in food or some other rich dish. There is also a sweet drink called Mango Lassi which is very rich and thick, made with yogurt, mango pulp, and pieces of mango.
Drinking alcohol is generally frowned upon. Muslims are prohibited from buying, possessing or consuming alcohol in Pakistan.
Alcohol (both imported and local) is available to non-Muslims in special shops and in bars in most top end hotels. There is also a huge black market across the country and the police tend to turn a blind eye to what is going on in private – still, relying on police practices is risky.
Murree Brewery is the only reputable maker of local alcoholic beer. The brand is widely available throughout Pakistan. They also produce non-alcoholic beverages, including juices.
Karachi is very lax towards alcohol with wine shops where one can get any brand of liquor. Also in other parts of Sindh, alcohol can be purchased from designated liquor shops. If you are a foreigner and looking for alcohol, you can contact the customer service department at Murree Brewery for assistance by telephone at☏+92 051-5567041-7.
Pakistanis drink a great deal of tea, which is locally called chai in most Pakistani languages. You can get tea anywhere, one variety or another. Both black with milk and green teas are popular – in different parts of Pakistan. It is one of the most consumed beverages in Pakistani cuisine. Different regions throughout the country have their own different flavours and varieties, giving Pakistani tea culture a diverse blend.
Biscuits are often enjoyed with tea.
Besides tea, there are other drinks that may be included as part of the Pakistani cuisine. All of them are non-alcoholic as the consumption of alcohol is prohibited by Islam. During the 20th century, drinks such as coffee and soft drinks have also become popular in Pakistan. It is very common to have soft drinks nowadays with Pakistani meals.
Pakistan, as a middle income country with a sizeable middle class and a significant domestic tourism industry, has a decent range of hotels covering all price ranges. International tourists are often disappointed by the cleanliness of Pakistani hotels - bedding is often clean but bathrooms can be a bit grungy. Pakistan is facing a significant slump in international tourist numbers; in the northern areas in particular you'll often find yourself the only guest.
BudgetThe cheapest hotels are usually found around busy transport hubs like bus and train stations. Don't be fooled by an impressive lobby - ask to see the room and check the beds, toilets, lights, etc, before checking in. Hot water and air conditioning will be luxuries in this class.
Mid rangecovers a wide spectrum of hotels - often listed in your guide book or on-line. All mid-range places will have a/c and hot water - although check if they have a working generator - air conditioning isn't of much use without electricity!  Always check the room before handing over any money - ask for a no smoking room away from the street - andhaggleto get a better rate. PTDC (government run) hotels fall in to the mid range section and warrant a special mention - often these places are the oldest hotel in town, in an excellent location, but the facilities will be showing their age. They are still a good option however, and discounts can be negotiated. Mid range prices are Rs2,000 - 6,000 per night.
Top endcovers theSerenas,Pearl ContinentalsandMarriotts. The Serena hotels are almost always excellent, whilst the Pearl Continental hotels are more patchy (e.g. the one inRawalpindiis a bit grungy whilst the one inMuzaffarabadis very nice. At top-end places, security is very visible with small armies of security guards stationed around the perimeter. Prices are from Rs6,000, with the big city luxury hotels charging at least Rs10,000 a night.
Government rest housesare mentioned in numerous guide books and are located in rural and mountainous areas for local civil servants to use on their travels, with many built pre-independence and exuding a quaint English charm. Previously the adventurous tourist could book these places for the night for Rs1,000 or so, and have a lovely time. But the tourist slump means that the forestry departments who run these places don't bother any more - phones will go unanswered - tourist information offices won't have any details etc, so count yourself lucky if you manage to arrange to stay in a Government rest house.
Solo female travellersare at a disadvantage when it comes to hotels. All budget and many mid-range places will be the sole reserve of men, in particular in the cities - and hotel owners may be uncomfortable with the idea of an unaccompanied women staying at their hotel. Hence you may be forced to stay at the upper-mid range and top end places - which will eat through your budget that much quicker. In some places the term "hotel" is reserved for simpler establishments, with "guest house" referring to medium-sized establishments where the standard is typically higher. Restaurants are also called "hotels", creating a fun potential for confusion.
The tension between India and Pakistan has deteriorated since a terrorist attack in Kashmir, with military attacks from both sides, with some civilian targets hit. The ceasefire of 10 May 2025 has been violated. See the warning box at the top of this page.
Otherwise, the security situation in Pakistan has improved considerably, but some Western governments still advised against travel to parts of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province, the city of Peshawar and districts south of the city, parts of Balochistan Province, the Karakorum Highway and areas within 10–50 km of the borders, and caution against non-essential travel to some other areas. Areas bordering Afghanistan (and in particular, the former FATA) has a high threat of terrorist attack against places that are frequented by foreigners, are more dangerous than other destinations, and are generally considered to be unsafe for travel.
In an emergency, call the police by15from any landline phone. To get an ambulance, dial115and1122from any landline or mobile phone.
Several extremist movements are active in the country, including the Pakistan So-called Taliban Movement (TTP), which seeks to destabilise the country's governance through terrorist attacks, most of which target Pakistani authorities, but also civilian targets such as schools, mosques, churches and mass gatherings.
Terrorists and organised crime have occasionally taken people hostage. As economic hardship has increased and pandemics, price rises and summer devastation have pushed people into poverty, conventional crime has increased, especially in large cities.
In big cities, there can be large gaps in security between the 'better off' areas and those inhabited by the less well-off. Be vigilant and avoid walking in the dark.
Westerners should avoid staying near mosques, especially during Friday afternoon prayers and major religious holidays. Some mosques are well protected and well-known tourist attractions, while others are dominated by radical movements. Check the local security situation before visiting.
Pakistan has endured several bomb attacks against security forces and so calledwestern institutions(e.g. the Marriott Hotel in Islamabad), and has seen the public assassination of former prime minister Benazir Bhutto upon her return from exile. These attacks have decreased significantly since 2014 due to successful military operations against terrorists. For the ordinary traveller, Pakistan has a tradition of hospitality that has been subverted by perceptions of 'Western' unfairness. Social protests tend to turn violent and political demonstrations are always sensitive. Before travelling you should check with your embassy about off-limits areas, the latest political and military developments and keep a close eye on current issues with independent news sources.
Stay away from military convoys as they are a potential target for suicide bombing. Similarly, going near military or intelligence facilities can be dangerous.
Carrying firearms can land you in police custody, except if you get a special permit from a relevant authority.
The line of control betweenAzad Kashmirand the Indian-administeredJammu and Kashmiris off-limits for foreign tourists, though domestic tourists can visit Azad Kashmir without any restriction, but should keep their identity cards with them.
The former Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) inNorthwest Pakistanand all regions near the sensitive Afghan bordershould not be visited at any timeby foreign tourists, as the Pakistan government haslittle to no authorityin these areas andcannot aid you in an emergency. If you do have reason to visit, seek expert guidance, including that of your embassy, who can advise you on the special permissions required.
Balochistanis considered dangerous and not fit for travellers. Many foreign nationals need to obtain aNo Objection Certificates(NOCs) to visit this province. Your embassy may be able to guide you better on obtaining the NOC.
The rules regardingsensitive areasand NOC,Note Verbals and other permissions and paperwork are ever-changing. The most notorious NOC regulation is for foreigners to enter Kashmir, partly to keep track of and control foreigners there. Outside Kashmir diplomats are the primary user of NOCs and theoretically the normal tourist should be exempt. However, you may be asked to produce an NOC whenever you step of a plane or out of a bus.
You may see road signs in English saying 'no foreigners allowed beyond this point', for example on the road to Kahuta near Islamabad. If you see and need to pass one of these signs, at the very least stop at the nearest police station and see if they will let you pass (speaking Urdu is an advantage here), or turn back and find another route. Typically, restricted areas are those with nuclear or military installations nearby. Kahuta, southeast of Islamabad, and the Sakesar hill station near the Amb temples in the Salt Range are two restricted areas the visitor may stumble across. Getting caught in a restricted area will mean a lot of wasted time, embarrassment and arrest.
Pakistan has a high number of fatal traffic collisions; WHO estimated 30,131 deaths on its roads in 2010 – one fatality for every third car.
Drivers are reckless and scoff at laws and what would be common courtesies in other countries. Their philosophy of "might is right" often leads to horrendous crashes between trucks and between trucks and buses.
Prostitution has no legal recognition in Pakistan.
Homosexuals should be very cautious in Pakistan, as homosexuality remains illegal in Pakistan and the results can be severe. Pakistani law criminalizes "unnatural carnal intercourse" (the definition of which includes homosexuality), and those convicted can be jailed for 10 years. Arrests for homosexuality are not common, though, as evidenced by a vibrant gay nightlife existing in many metropolitan areas.
Pakistan has lower hygiene standards than that of Western nations.
Visitors are strongly advised to refrain from drinkingtap water; many Pakistani locals themselves drink boiled or purified water. Take every precaution to drink only boiled, filtered or bottled water. Tap water is known to contain many impurities. Ice is usually made from regular tap-water, and may be even harder to avoid. Fresh milk from the carrier should be boiled and cooled before consumption. Non-pasteurized dairy can spread tuberculosis, which might be the cause of those hacking coughs you hear on the street. Trusted brands are available at most grocery stores, including Nestle Milk Pack, Haleeb Milk and Olpers.
Take precautions against bothdengue feverandmalaria, which are both spread bymosquitoes. The first and most effective way is to avoid getting bitten, but if you plan to stay in a place where malaria is common, you will need to take prophylactic medicines such asProguanil, doxycycline, or mefloquine. The risk of getting malaria decreases with higher altitudes and is usually negligible above2,500m (8,200ft).
No prophylaxis or cure is available for dengue fever. It is prevalent during summer, especially during the monsoon (July to September) and can be fatal. It is caused by mosquitoes that bite during the day and the most widespread outbreaks of dengue are expected in the province Punjab.
In the summer it gets very hot, so stayhydrated. Temperatures may rise to 50°C in June and July, but, as soon as monsoon rains set in during Aug–Sept, it cools to around 30°C – but with high levels of humidity.
Do not eat food that has been lying out for some time, as high temperatures speed up deterioration. Avoid posh but unfrequented restaurants.
Some Pakistani dishes can be very spicy! Always notify your host, cook or waiter if you cannot tolerate very spicy food.
Despite sharp political and religious differences, Pakistan and India share a common culture; the various respect tips found in theIndiaarticle will come in handy during your visit.
The culture has a strong tradition of hospitality. Guests are often treated extremely well. Pakistanis pride themselves on their tradition of hospitality to guests (mehmanawaziin Urdu). Nonetheless, Pakistan does not see many foreigners and there is some insularity as well; consequently foreigners may be occasionally regarded with suspicion and attract stares. But in general, Pakistanis are warm, friendly and generous individuals with a strong interest in foreigners and other cultures.
Thanks to the traditionally close and friendly diplomatic relationship betweenChinaand Pakistan, Chinese people may find themselves being exceptionally welcomed by Pakistanis.
Pakistanis will understand that you are not fully aware of what's considered appropriate/inappropriate in their country, and they will usually be tolerant of your blunders. This said, you should avoid doing the following during your stay in the country.
Thecountry codefor Pakistan is +92 if you are calling from outside the country. Phone numbers are seven digits long with a two-digit city code in larger districts, and six digits long with a three-digit city code in smaller districts, for a total of nine digits as a standard nationwide (except forAzad Kashmir). All mobile numbers, however, are seven digits long and begin with a four digit network code "03XX", where XX indicates the cellular provider. Thus Pakistani mobile numbers are linked to one particular cellular provider, NOT one particular city as in North America. Therefore the city prefix should not be dialled in addition to the cellular prefix. As in many countries, omit the initial zero when dialling a city or cell code from outside Pakistan and prefix the '92' country code after dialling your country's international access code. Thus Telenor cell number 765 4321 dialled from the USA/Canada would be 011 92 345 765 4321 and Peshawar landline 234-5678 dialled from France or the UK would be 00 92 91 234-5678.
The international access code for outgoing calls from Pakistan is 00.
PTCLoffers landline and wireless phone services.
Public Call Officescan be found all over the country. You will find a PCO in nearly 50% of the general stores where there is usually someone who operates the phone and fax. Fees will be charged according to the time spent, and you will pay when you have finished your call.
Major providers of mobile phone service (GSM) are:
One very convenient feature is that all Pakistani cellular operators use the GSM platform, so that cellular handsets nationwide are freely interchangeable between providers.
Cell phones were considered as a status symbol a few years ago but, since 2002, the telecommunications industry has experienced a bit of a boom. These days you can hardly find a single person in the country without a personal cell phone. There are various service providers offering a huge variety of plans. Among them are Jazz, Warid Telecom, Telenor, Ufone & Zong (China Mobile). It's not a bad idea to buy a cell phone and use a prepaid plan to get yourself connected while you are in the country. The mobile phones and the prepaid plans are very cheap; you can usually get a new cheap cell phone just for Rs2,000 and a prepaid connection for Rs150-400.
Due to security threats, in order to purchase a SIM card you will need to provide formal identification such as visas, resident permits and residing address in Pakistan along with a written declaration that you will not use the provided phone number for any illegal activity. Starting March 2015, possession of an unverified SIM will be considered a serious and punishable crime.
Cybercafescan be found on virtually every street corner and the rates are as low as Rs40-50 per hour. The vast majority of computers are still limited to either Windows XP or Windows 7, so patience is necessary for more modern websites. Most of the cafes have a decent speed internet connection.
Internet Access can be obtained easily on notebook computers with the help of GPRS enabled mobile connections, supported by almost all of the five mobile operators.Jazzprovides 3G and 4G based connection in urban areas of the country,Telenor's also provides services in 3G to most of the urban parts of country. The standard price of GPRS/EDGE usage is Rs10-18 per MB of data transferred butZongoffers Rs15/h. If you wish to download much more, you may want to use unlimited packages, provided only by all networks.World CallandUfonealso offers a USB Modem. 3G and 4G based connections are also available from all the mobile service providers.
Wateen, WiTribe, and Qubee are WiMax internet providers. National telecommunication company PTCL offers a USB EVo device for very fast internet connections.
There areWi-Fi hotspotsall over Pakistan, in hotels, malls, and cafes/restaurants.
The first time 5G was ever tested was in Pakistan. 5G service will be commercially available in the country after November 2022.